introduction to hind sarage or Indian
home rule this LibriVox recording is in
the public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org
read by Michelle fry Baton Rouge
Louisiana hind sarage or Indian home
rule by mandes karamchand Gandhi fifth
edition by Ganesh and Company published
1922 introductory note forward and reply
to
critics note by C rajik kapalar saaga
sabba madress
669 the doctrine of violence is more
widely believed in than is generally
realized the voies of violence can be
divided into two classes some a small
and dwindling class believe in it and
are prepared to act according to their
faith others a very large class always
and now after bitter experiences of the
failure of constitutional agitation
larger than ever believe in violence but
that belief does not lead them to action
it disables them from work on any basis
other than Force the belief in violence
serves to dissuade them from all other
kinds of work or sacrifice in both cases
the the evil is great there can be no
reconstruction or hope for this land of
ours unless we eradicate the worship of
force in all its forms and establish
work on a basis other than violence a
reputation of the doctrine of violence
is in the present situation of the
Affairs of our country more necessary
than
ever to this end nothing better can be
conceived than the publication and wide
distribution of Mr Gandhi's famous book
it was extremely patriotic of mr's ganes
and Company to have readily agreed to
undertake the work when they were
approached with the
request forward Bombay 28th May
1919 MK
Gandhi I have reread this booklet more
than once the value at the present
moment lies in reprinting it as it is
but if I had to revise it there is only
one word I would alter in accordance
with the promise made to an English
friend she took exception to my use of
the word prostitute in speaking of the
parliament her fine taste recoiled from
the indelicacy of the expression I
remind the reader that the booklet
purports to be a free translation of the
original which is in
garati after years of endeavored to put
into practice the views expressed in the
following pages I feel that the way
shown herein is the only true way to
sarage saaga the law of Love is the law
of Life departure from it leads to
disintegration a firm adherence to it
leads to
Regeneration reply to critics MK Gandhi
young India 26th January
1921 it is certainly my good fortune
that this booklet of mine is receiving
wide attention the original is in garati
it had a checkered career it was first
published in The Columns of the Indian
opinion of South Africa It Was Written
in 1908 during my return Voyage from
London to South Africa in answer to the
Indian School of violence and its
prototype in South Africa I came in
contact with every known Indian
Anarchist in London
their bravery impressed me but I feel
that their Zeal was misguided I felt
that violence was no remedy for India's
ills and that her civilization required
the use of a different and higher weapon
for self- protection the saaga of South
Africa was still an infant hardly 2
years old but it had developed
sufficiently to permit me to write of it
with some degree of
confidence it was so much appreciated
that it was published as a booklet it
attracted attracted some attention in
India the Bombay government prohibited
its
circulation I replied by publishing its
translation I thought that it was due to
my English friends that they should know
its contents in my opinion it is a book
which can be put into the hands of a
child it teaches the gospel of love in
the place of that of hate it replaces
violence with
self-sacrifice it pits Soul Force
against brute force it has gone through
several additions and I commend it to
those who would care to read it I
withdraw nothing except one word of it
and that in deference to a lady friend I
have given the reason for the alteration
in the preface to the Indian
Edition the booklet is a severe
condemnation of modern
civilization It Was Written in
1908 my conviction is deeper today than
ever I feel that if India would discard
modern civilization she can only gain by
doing
so but I would warn the reader against
thinking that I am today aiming at the
sarage described
therein I know that India is not ripe
for it it may seem an impertinence to
say so but such is my conviction I am
individually working for the self-rule
pictured therein but today my corporate
activity is undoubtedly devoted to the
attainment M of parliamentary sarage in
accordance with the wishes of the people
of India I am not aiming at destroying
Railways or hospitals though I would
certainly welcome their natural
destruction neither Railways nor
hospitals are a test of a high and pure
civilization at best they are a
necessary evil neither adds one inch to
the moral stature of a Nation nor am I
aiming at a permanent destruction of Law
Courts much as I regard as a
consummation devoutly to be wished for
still less am I trying to destroy all
machinery and Mills it requires a higher
Simplicity and renunciation than the
people are today prepared
for the only part of the program which
is now being carried out in its entirety
is that of
nonviolence but I regret to have to
confess that even that is not being
carried out in the spirit of the book if
it were India would establish SWAT
in a day if India adopted the doctrine
of love as an active part of her
religion and introduced it into her
politics saraj would descend upon India
from heaven but I am painfully aware
that that event is far off as
yet I offer these comments because I
observe that much is being quoted from
the booklet to discredit the present
movement I have even seen writings
suggesting that I am playing a deep game
that I am using the present turmoil to
foist my fads on India and I'm making
religious experiments at India's
expense I can only answer that saaga is
made of Sterner stuff there is nothing
reserved and nothing Secret in it a
portion of the whole theory of Life
described in hin swaraj is undoubtedly
being carried into practice there is no
danger attendant on the whole of it
being practiced but it is not right to
scare away people by reproducing from my
writings passages that are irrelevant to
the issue before the
country end of note forward and reply to
critics chapter one of hind sarage or
Indian home rule this is a LibriVox
recording all LibriVox recordings are in
the public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org
read by Michelle fry Baton Rouge
Louisiana hin swaraj or Indian home rule
by mandes karamchand Gandhi chapter 1
the Congress and its
officials
reader just at present there is a home
rule wave passing over India all our
countrymen appear to be Pine ing for
National Independence a similar Spirit
pervades them even in South Africa
Indians seem to be eager after acquiring
rights will you explain your views in
this
matter
editor you have well put the question
but the answer is not easy one of the
objects of a newspaper is to understand
the popular feeling and to give
expression to it another is to arouse
among the people certain desirable
sentiment ments and the third is
fearlessly to expose popular
defects the exercise of all these three
functions is involved in answering your
question to a certain extent the
people's will has to be expressed
certain sentiments will need to be
fostered and defects will have to be
brought to light but as you have asked
the question it is my duty to answer
it Reader do you then consider that a
desire for home rule has been created
Among
Us editor that desire gave rise to the
National Congress the choice of the word
national implies
it Reader that surely is not the case
young India seems to ignore the Congress
it is considered to be an instrument for
perpetuating British
rule editor that opinion is not
justified had not the grand old man of
India prepared the soil our young men
could not have even spoken about home
rule how can we forget what Mr Hume has
written how he has lashed us into action
and with what effort he has awakened Us
in order to achieve the objects of the
Congress Sir William wurn has given his
body mind and money to the same cause
his writings are worthy of perusal to
this
day Professor go in order to prepare the
nation embraced poverty and gave 20
years of his life even now he is living
in
poverty the late Justice Budin tab G was
also one of those who through the
Congress SED the seed of home rule
similarly in Bengal madis the Punjab and
other places there have been lovers of
India and members of the Congress both
Indian and
English reader Stay Stay you are going
too far you were straying away from my
question I have asked you about home or
self-rule you are discussing foreign
rule I do not desire to hear English
names and you are giving me such names
in these circumstances I do not think we
can ever meet I shall be pleased if you
will confine yourself to home rule all
other wise talk will not satisfy
me editor you are impatient I cannot
afford to be likewise if you will bear
with me for a while I think you you will
find that you will obtain what you want
remember the old proverb that the tree
does not grow in one day the fact that
you have checked me and that you do not
want to hear about the well- wishers of
India shows that for you at any rate
home rule is yet far away if we had many
like you we would never make any advance
this thought is worthy of your
attention reader it seems to me that you
simply want to put me off by talking
round and round Those whom you consider
to be wellwishers of India are not such
in my
estimation why then should I listen to
your discourse on such people what has
he whom you consider to be the father of
the nation done for it he says that the
English Governors will do justice and
that we should cooperate with
them
editor I must tell you with all
gentleness that it must be a matter of
Shame for us that you should speak about
that great man in terms of disrespect
just look at his work he has dedicated
his life to the service of India we have
learned what we know from
him it was the respected D who taught us
that the English had sucked our
lifeblood what does it matter that today
his trust is still in the English nation
is dead AB less to be honored because in
the exuberance of Youth we are prepared
to go a step further are we on that
account wiser than he is it a mark of
wisdom not to kick against the very step
from which we have risen higher the
removal of a step from a staircase
brings down the whole of it when out of
infancy we grow into youth we do not
despise infancy but on the contrary we
recall with affection the days of our
childhood if after many years of study a
teacher were to teach me something and
if I were to build a little more on the
foundation laid by that teacher I would
not on that account be considered why
wiser than the teacher he would always
command my respect such is the case with
the grand old man of India we must admit
that he is the author of
nationalism reader you have spoken well
I can now understand that we must look
upon Mr datapay with
respect without him and men like him we
would probably not have the spirit that
fires us how can the same be said of
Professor Galay he has constituted
himself a great friend of the English he
says that we have to learn a great deal
from them that we have to learn their
political wisdom before we can talk of
home rule I am tired of reading his
speeches editor if you are tired it only
betrays your impatience we believe that
those who are discontented with the
slowness of their parents and are angry
because the parents would not run with
their children are considered
disrespectful to their
parents professor gal occupies the place
of a parent what does it matter if he
cannot run with us a nation that is
desirous of securing home rule cannot
afford to despise its ancestors we shall
become useless if we lack respect for
our
elders only men with mature thoughts are
capable of ruling themselves and not the
Hasty tempered moreover how many Indians
were there like Professor Galay when he
gave himself to Indian
education I very believe that whatever
Professor Galay does he does with pure
motives and with a view to serving India
his Devotion to the motherland is so
great that he would give his life for it
if
necessary whatever he says is said not
to flatter anyone but because he
believes it to be true we are bound
therefore to entertain the highest
regard for
him reader are we then to follow him in
every respect
editor I never said any such thing if we
conscientiously differed from him the
Learned Professor himself would advise
us to follow the dictates of our
conscience rather than him our chief
purpose is not to cry down his work but
to believe that he is infinitely greater
than we and to feel assured that
compared with his work for India ours is
infinitesimal several newspapers write
disrespectfully of him it is our duty to
protect protest against such writings we
should consider men like Professor gay
to be the pillars of home rule it is a
bad habit to say that another man's
thoughts are bad and ours only are good
and that those holding different views
from ours are the enemies of the
country reader I now begin to understand
somewhat your meaning I shall have to
think the matter over but what you say
about Mr Hume and Sir William wurn is
beyond compreh
apprehension
editor the same rule holds good for the
English as for the Indians I can never
subscribe to the statement that all
Englishmen are bad many Englishmen
Desire home rule for India that the
English people are somewhat more selfish
than others is true but that does not
prove that every Englishman is bad we
who seek Justice will have to do justice
to others Sir William does not wish ill
to India that should be enough for us as
we proceed you will see that if we act
justly India will be sooner
free you will see too that if we shun
every Englishman as an enemy home rule
will be delayed but if we are just to
them we shall receive their support in
our progress towards the
goal reader all this seems to me at
present to be simply nonsensical English
support and the obtaining of home rule
are too kind contradictory things how
can the English people tolerate home
rule for us but I do not want you to
decide this question for me just yet to
pass time over it is useless when you
have shown me how we can have home rule
perhaps I shall understand your views
you have prejudiced me against you by
discoursing on English help I would
therefore beseech you not to continue
this
subject editor I have no desire to do so
that you are prejudiced against me is
not a matter for much anxiety it is well
that I should say unpleasant things at
the commencement it is my duty patiently
to try to remove your
Prejudice reader I like that last
statement it emboldens me to say what I
like one thing still puzzles me I do not
understand how the Congress laid the
foundation of home
rule editor let us see the Congress
brought together Indians from different
parts of India and enthused us with the
idea of
nationality the government used to look
upon it with disfavor the Congress has
always insisted that the nation should
control revenue and expenditure it has
always desired self-government after the
Canadian model whether we can get it or
not whether we desire it or not and
whether there is not something more
desirable are different questions all I
have to show is that the Congress gave
us a foretaste of home rule to deprive
Riv it of the honor is not proper and
for us to do so would not only be
ungrateful but the Fulfillment of
our object to treat the Congress as an
institution inimical to our growth as a
nation could disable us from using that
body end of chapter
1 chapter 2 of H sarage or Indian home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
read by Michelle fry Baton Rouge
Louisiana hind swaraj or Indian home
rule by mandes karamchand
Gandhi chapter two the partition of
Bengal
reader considering the matter as you put
it it seems proper to say that the
foundation of home rule was laid by the
Congress but you will admit that it
cannot be considered a real Awakening
when and how did The Awakening take
place
editor the seed is never seen it works
underneath the ground is itself
destroyed and the tree which rises above
the ground is alone seen
such is the case with the Congress yet
what you call the real Awakening took
place after the partition of Bengal for
this we have to be thankful to Lord
kerzon at the time of the partition the
people of Bengal reasoned with Lord
keron but in the pride of power he
disregarded all their prayers he took it
for granted that Indians could only
prattle that they could never take any
effective steps he used insulting
language and in the teeth of all
opposition partitioned
bangal that day may be considered to be
the day of the partition of the British
Empire the shock that the British power
received through the partition has never
been equaled by any other act this does
not mean that the other injustices done
to India are less glaring than that done
by the partition the salt tax is not a
small Injustice we shall see many such
things later on but the people were
ready to resist the
partition at that time the feeling ran
high many leading balies were ready to
lose their all they knew their power
hence the conf
floration it is now well nigh
unquenchable it is not necessary to
quench it either partition will go
bangal will be reunited but the rift in
the English bark will remain it must
daily
widen India awakened is not not likely
to fall asleep demand for abrogation of
partition is tantamount to demand for
home rule leaders in bangal know this
British officials realize it that is why
petition Still Remains as time passes
the nation is being forged nations are
not formed in a day the formation
requires
years reader what in your opinion are
the results of partition
editor hither to we have considered that
for redress of grievances we must
approach the throne and if we get no
redress we must sit still except that we
may still
petition after the partition people saw
that petitions must be backed up by
force and that they must be capable of
suffering this new spirit must be
considered to be the chief result of
partition that Spirit was seen in the
outspoken writings in the
press that which the people said
tremblingly and in secret began to be
said and to be written
publicly the swadeshi movement was
inaugurated people young and old used to
run away at the sight of an English face
it now no longer Ed them they did not
fear even a row or being imprisoned some
of the best sons of India are at present
in
banishment this is something different
from Mere petitioning thus are the
people moved the spirit generated in
Bengal has spread in the North to the
Punjab and in the South to Cape
Comin reader do you suggest any other
striking
result editor the partition has not only
made a rift in the English ship but it
has made it in ours also great events
always produce great results our leaders
are divided into two parties the
moderates and the extremists these may
be considered as the slow party and the
impatient party some call the moderates
the timid party and the extremists the
Bold party all interpret the two words
according to their
preconceptions this much is certain that
there has arisen an enmity between the
two the one distrusts the other and
imputes motives at the time of the Surat
Congress there was almost a fight I
think that this division is not a good
thing for the country but I think also
that such divisions will not last long
it all depends upon the leaders how long
they will
last end of chapter
2 chapter three of hind sarage or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunte ER please visit librivox.org
read by Michelle fry vaton Rouge
Louisiana hind swaraj or Indian home
rule by mandas Karam Chand
Gandhi chapter three discontent and
unrest reader then you consider
partition to be a cause of the Awakening
do you welcome the unrest which has
resulted from
it editor
when a man rises from sleep he twists
his Limbs and is restless it takes some
time before he is entirely awakened
similarly although the partition has
caused an Awakening the comos has not
yet disappeared we are still twisting
our Limbs and still restless and just as
the state between sleep and Awakening
must be considered to be necessary so
may the present unrest in India be
considered a necessary and therefore a
proper state the knowledge that there is
unrest will it is highly probable enable
us to outgrow it rising from sleep we do
not continue in a comos state but
according to our ability sooner or later
we are completely restored to our senses
so shall we be free from the present
unrest which no one
likes reader what is the other form of
unrest
editor unrest is in reality disc content
the latter is only now described as
unrest during the Congress period it was
labeled discontent Mr Hume always said
that the spread of discontent in India
was
necessary this discontent is a very
useful thing so long as a man is
contented with his present lot so long
is it difficult to persuade him to come
out of it therefore it is that every
reform must be preceded by
discontent we throw away things we have
only when we cease to like them such
discontent has been produced Among Us
after reading the great works of Indians
and
Englishmen discontent has led to unrest
and the latter has brought about many
deaths many imprisonments many
banishments such a state of things will
still continue it must be so all these
may be considered good signs but they
may also lead to bad
results end of chapter 3
chapter 4 of hin swaj or Indian home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Pamela nagami hind swaraj
or Indian home rule by mandas karamchand
Gandhi chapter 4 what is
swaraj reader I have now learned what
the Congress has done to make India One
Nation how the partition has caused an
Awakening and how discontent and unrest
have spread through the land I would
like now to learn your views on swaraj I
fear that our interpretation is not the
same editor it is quite possible that we
do not attach the same meaning to the
term you and I and all Indians are
impatient to obtain swaraj but we are
certainly not decided as to what it is
to drive the English out of India is the
thought heard from many mouths but it
does not seem that many have properly
considered why it should be so I must
ask you a question do you think that it
is necessary to drive away the English
if we get all we want reader I should
ask of them only one thing that is
please leave our country if after they
have complied with this request their
withdrawal in India means that they are
still in India I should have no
objection then we should understand that
in our language the word gone is
equivalent to remained editor well then
let us suppose that the English have
retired what will you do then reader
that question cannot be answered at this
stage this the state after withdrawal
will depend largely upon the manner of
it if as you assume they retire it seems
to me we shall still keep their
constitution and shall carry on the
government if they simply retire for the
asking we should have an army Etc ready
at hand we should therefore have no
difficulty in carrying on the government
editor you may think so I do not but I
will not discuss the matter just now I
have to answer your question and that I
can do well by asking you several
questions why do you want to drive away
the English reader because India has
become impoverished by their government
they take away our money from year to
year the most important posts are
reserved for themselves we are kept in a
state of slavery they behave insolently
toward us and disregard our feelings
editor if they do not take our money
away become gentle and give us
responsible post hosts would you still
consider their presence to be harmful
reader the question is useless it is
similar to the question whether there is
any harm in associating with a tiger if
he changes his nature such a question is
sheer waste of time when a tiger changes
his nature Englishmen will change theirs
this is not possible and to believe it
to be possible is contrary to Human
Experience editor supposing we get self
government similar to what the Canadians
and the South Africans have will it be
good enough
reader that question also is useless we
may get it when we have the same Powers
we shall then hoist our own flag as is
Japan so must India be we must own our
Navy our army and we must have our own
Splendor and then will India's voice
ring through the world editor you have
well drawn the picture in effect means
this that we want English rule without
the Englishman you want the Tiger's
nature but not the tiger that is to say
you will make India English and when it
becomes English it will be called not
Hindu stand but English
Stan this is not the swage that I want
reader I have placed before you my idea
of swaj as I think it should be if the
education we have received be of any use
if the works of Spencer mil and others
be of any importance and if the English
Parliament be the mother of parliaments
I certainly think that we should copy
the English people and this to such an
extent that just as they do not allow
others to obtain a footing in their
country so we should not allow them or
others to obtain it in ours what they
have done in their own country has not
been done in any other country it is is
therefore proper for us to import their
institutions but now I want to know your
views
editor there is Need for patience My
Views will develop of themselves in the
course of this discourse it is as
difficult for me to understand the true
nature of swaj as it seems to you to be
easy I shall therefore for the time
being content myself with endeavoring to
show that what you call swage is not
truly
swaj end of chapter
4 chapter five of hin swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Pamela nagami hin swaj or
Indian home rule by mandas karamchand
Gandhi chapter 5 the condition of
England reader then from your statement
I deduce the government of England is
not desirable and not worth copying by
us editor your deduction is Justified
the condition of England at present is
pitiable I pray to God that India may
never be in that plight that which you
consider to be the mother of parliaments
is like a sterile woman and a prostitute
both these are harsh terms but exactly
fit the case that Parliament has not yet
of its own accord done a single good
thing hence I have compared it to a
sterile woman the natural condition of
that Parliament is such that without
outside pressure it can do nothing it is
like a prostitute because it is under
the control of ministers who change from
time to time today it is under Mr asth
tomorrow it may be under Mr balfor
reader you have said this sarcastically
the term sterile woman is not applicable
the parliament being elected by the
people must work under public pressure
this is its quality editor you are
mistaken let us examine it a little more
closely the best men are supposed to be
elected by the people the members serve
without pay and therefore it must be
assumed only for the public wheel the
electors are considered to be educated
in their for we should assume that they
would not generally make mistakes in
their choice such a parliament should
not need the spur of petitions or any
other pressure its work should be so
smooth that its effect would be more
apparent day by day but as a matter of
fact it is generally acknowledged that
the members are hypocritical and selfish
each thinks of his own little interest
it is fear that is the guiding motive
what is done today may be undone
tomorrow it is not possible to recall a
single instance in which the finality
can be predicted for its work when the
greatest questions are debated its
members have been seen to stretch
themselves into
doze sometimes the members talk away
until the listeners are disgusted
Carlile has called it the Talking Shop
of the world members vote for their
party without a thought their so-called
discipline binds them to it if any
member by way of exception gives an
independent vote he is considered a
renegade if the money and the time
Wasted by the parliament were entrusted
to A Few Good Men the English Nation
would be occupying today a much higher
platform the parliament is simply a
costly toy of the nation these views are
by no means peculiar to me some great
English thinkers have Express them one
of the members of the parliament
recently said that a true Christian
would not become a member of it another
said it was a baby and if it has
remained a baby after an existence of
700 years when will it outgrow its
babyhood reader you have set me thinking
you do not expect me to accept it once
all you say you give me entirely novel
views I shall have to digest them will
you now explain the epithet
prostitute editor that you cannot accept
my views at once is only right right if
you will read the literature on this
subject you will have some idea of it
the parliament is without a real master
under the Prime Minister its movement is
not steady but it is buffeted about like
a prostitute the prime minister is more
concerned about his power than about the
welfare of the parliament his energy is
concentrated upon securing the success
of his party his care is not always that
the parliament should do right Prime
Ministers are known to have made the
parliament do things merely for party
Advantage all this is worth thinking
over reader then you are really
attacking the very men whom we have
hitherto considered to be patriotic and
honest editor yes that is true I can
have nothing against Prime Ministers but
what I have seen leads me to think that
they cannot be considered really
patriotic if they are to be considered
honest because they do not take what is
generally known as bribery let them be
so considered but they are open to
subtler influences in order to gain
their ends they certainly bribe people
with honors I do not hesitate to say
that they have neither real honesty nor
a living conscience reader as you
express these views about the parliament
I would like to hear you on the English
people so that I may have your views of
their government Editor to the English
voters their newspaper is their Bible
they take cue from their newspapers
which latter are often dishonest the
same fact is differently interpreted by
different newspapers according to the
party in whose interests they are edited
one newspaper would consider a great
English man to be a paragon of honesty
another would consider him dishonest
what must be the condition of the people
whose newspapers are of this type reader
you shall describe it
editor these people change their views
frequently it is said that they change
them every seven years these views swing
like the pendulum of a clock and are
never steadfast the people would follow
a powerful oror or a man who gives them
parties receptions Etc as are the people
so was their Parliament they have
certainly one quality very strongly
developed they will never allow their
country to be lost if any person were to
cast an evil eye on it they would pluck
out his eyes but that does not mean that
the nation possesses every other virtue
or that it should be imitated if India
copies England it is my firm conviction
that she will be ruined reader to what
do you describe this state of England
editor it is not due to any peculiar
fault of the English people but the
condition is due to Modern
civilization it is a civilization only
in name under it the nations of Europe
are becoming degraded and ruined Day by
Day end of chapter
5 chapter six of hin swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Pamela nagami hin swaraj or
Indian home rule by mandas karaman
Gandhi chapter 6
civilization reader now you will have to
explain what you mean by civilization
editor it is not a question of what I
mean several English writers refuse to
call that Civilization which passes
under that name
many books have been written about that
subject societies have been formed to
cure the nation of the evils of
civilization a great English writer has
written a work called civilization its
cause and cure therein he has called it
a
disease reader why do we not know this
generally editor the answer is very
simple we rarely find people arguing
against themselves those who are
Intoxicated by modern civilization are
not likely to write against it their
care will be to find out facts and
arguments in support of it in this they
do unconsciously believing it to be true
a man whilst he is dreaming believes in
his dream he is UND deceived only when
he is awakened from his sleep a man
laboring under the bane of civilization
is like a dreaming man what we usually
read are the work of Defenders of modern
civilization which undoubtedly claims
among its voies very brilliant and even
some very good men their writings
hypnotize us and so one by one we are
drawn into the Vortex reader this seems
to be very plausible now will you tell
me something of what you have read and
thought of this
civilization editor Let us first
consider what state of things is
described by the word
civilization its true test lies in the
fact that people living in it make
bodily welfare the object of life we
will take some examples the people of
Europe today live in Better Built houses
than they did a 100 years ago this is
considered an emblem of civilization and
this is also a matter to promote bodily
happiness formerly they wore skins and
used as their weapons Spears now they
wear long trousers and for embellishing
their bodies they wear a variety of
clothing and instead instead of Spears
they carry with them revolvers
containing five or more Chambers if
people of a certain country who have
hither to not been in the habit of
wearing much clothing boots Etc adopt
European clothing they are supposed to
have become civilized out of savagery
formerly in Europe people plowed their
lands mainly by manual labor now one man
can plow a vast tract by means of steam
engines and can thus amass great wealth
this is called a sign of civil
civilization formerly the fewest men
wrote books that were most valuable now
anybody writes and prints anything he
likes and poisons people's minds
formerly men traveled in wagons now they
fly through the air in trains at the
rate of 400 and more miles per day this
is considered the height of
civilization it has been stated that as
men progress they shall be able to
travel in airships and reach any part of
the world in a few hours men will not
need the use of their hands and feet
they will press a button and they will
have their clothing by their side they
will press another button and they will
have their newspaper a third and a
motorc car will be waiting for them they
will have a variety of delicately dished
up food everything will be done by
Machinery formerly when people wanted to
fight with one another they measured
between them their bodily strength now
it is possible to take away thousand
thousands of lives by one man working
behind a gun from a hill this is
civilization formerly men worked in the
open air only so much as they liked now
thousands of workmen meet together and
for the sake of Maintenance work in
factories or mines their condition is
worse than that of beasts they are
obliged to work at the risk of their
lives at most dangerous occupations for
the sake of
millionaires formerly men were made
slaves under physical compulsion now
they are enslaved by temptation of money
and of the luxuries that money can buy
there are now diseases of which people
never dreamt before and an army of
doctors is engaged in finding out their
cures and so hospitals have increased
this is a test of
civilization formerly special Messengers
were required and much expense was
incurred in order to send letters today
anyone can abuse uses fellow by means of
a letter for one penny true at the same
cost one can send one thanks also
formerly people had two or three meals
consisting of homemade bread and
vegetables now they require something to
eat every 2 hours so that they have
hardly Leisure for anything else what
more need I say all this you can
ascertain from several authoritative
books these are all true tests of
civilization and if one speaks to the
contrary know that he is ignorant this
civilization takes note neither of
morality nor of religion its voies
calmly state that their business is not
to teach religion some even consider it
to be a superstitious growth others put
on the cloak of religion and prayed
about morality but after 20 years
experience I have come to the conclusion
that immorality is often taught in the
name of morality even a child can
understand that in all I have described
above there can be no inducement to
morality civilization seeks to increase
bodily Comforts and it fails miserably
even in doing so this civilization is
irreligion and it has taken such a hold
on the people in Europe that those who
are in it appear to be half mad they
lack real physical strength or courage
they keep up their energy by
intoxication they can hardly be happy in
solitude
women who should be the queens of
households wander in the streets or they
slave away in factories for the sake of
a pittance half a million women in
England alone are laboring under trying
circumstances in factories or similar
institutions this awful fact is one of
the causes of the daily growing suffer
jet
movement this civilization is such that
one has only to be patient and it will
be self- destroyed
according to the teaching of Muhammad
this would be considered a satanic
civilization Hinduism calls it the Black
age I cannot give you an adequate
conception of it it is eating into the
vitals of the English Nation it must be
shunned parliaments are really emblems
of slavery if you will sufficiently
think over this you will entertain the
same opinion and cease to blame the
English they rather deserve our sympathy
they are a shrewd nation and I therefore
believe they will cast off the evil they
are enterprising and industrious and
their mode of thought is not inherently
immoral neither are they bad at heart I
therefore respect them civilization is
not an incurable disease but it should
never be forgotten that the English
people are at present afflicted by it
end of chapter 6
chapter 7th of hin swaraj or Indian home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
huage or Indian home rule by Mohandas
Karam Shan Gandhi chapter 7 why was in
India
lost
reader you've said much about
civilization enough to make me ponder
over it I do not now know what I should
adopt and what I should avoid from the
nations of Europe but one question comes
to my lips immediately if civilization
is a disease and if it has attack
England why has she been able to take
India and why is she able to retain it
editor your question is not very
difficult to answer and we shall
presently be able to examine the true
nature of
sarage for I am aware that I have still
to answer that
question I will however take up your
previous
question the English have not taken
India we have given it to them they are
not in India because because of their
strength but because we keep them let us
now see whether these propositions can
be
sustained they came to our country
originally for purposes of
trade recall the company
Bahu who made it
Bahu they had not the slightest
intention at the time of establishing a
kingdom who assisted the company's
officers who was tempted at the sight of
their silver who bought their goods
history testifies that we did all this
in order to become rich or at once we
welcome the company's officers with open
arms we assisted them if I'm in the
habit of drinking bang and a seller
thereof sells it to me am I to blame him
or
myself by blaming the seller shall I be
able to avoid the
habit and if a particular retailer is
driven away will not another take his
place a true servant of India will have
to go to the root of the matter if an
excess of food has caused me
indigestion I'll will certainly not
avoided by blaming War he's a true
physician who proves the cause of
disease and if you pose as a physician
for the disease of India you will have
to find out its true cause
reader you are right now I think you'll
not have to argue much with me to drive
your conclusion home I'm impatient to
know your further views we are now on a
most interesting topic I shall therefore
Endeavor to follow your thought and stop
you when I'm in
doubt editor I'm afraid that in spite of
your enthusiasm as we proceed further we
shall have differences of opinion
nevertheless I shall argue only when you
will stop me we have already seen that
the English merchants were able to get a
footing in India because we encouraged
them when our princes fought among
themselves they sought the assistance of
company
Bahu that coroporation was worth alike
in Commerce and War it was unhampered by
questions of
morality its object was to increase its
Commerce and to make money it accepted
our assistance and increased the number
of its
warehouses to protect the L it employed
an army which was utilized by us
also is it not then useless to blame the
English for what we did at that time the
Hindus and the muhammadans were at
daggers grone these two gave the company
its opportunity thus we created the
circumstances that gave the companies
control over India hence it's trer to
say that we gave India to the English
then that India was
lost
reader will you now tell me how they are
able to retain
India
editor the causes that gave them India
enable them to retain it some Englishmen
state that they took and they hold in
India by the sword both these statements
are wrong the sword is entirely useless
for holding India we alone keep them
Napoleon is said to have described the
English as a nation of
shopkeepers It's A fitting
description they hold whatever dominions
they have for the sake of their
Commerce their army and their Navy are
intended to protect it and the transv
offered no such directions the late Mr
Gladstone discovered that it was not
right for the English to hold it when it
became a paying proposition resistance
led to war Mr Chamberlain soon
discovered that England enjoyed a sanity
over the trans War it's related that
someone asked the late president Krueger
whether there was gold in the moon he
replied that it was highly unlikely
because if there were English would have
annexed it many problems can be solved
by remembering that money is their God
then it follows that we keep the English
in India for our base
self-interest we like their Commerce
they please Us by their subtle methods
and get what they want from us to blame
them for this is to perpetuate their
power we further strengthen their hold
by quarreling amongst
ourselves if you accept the above
statements it's proved that the English
entered India for the purposes of trade
they remain in it for the same purpose
and we help them to do so their arms and
ammunition are perfectly useless in this
connection I remind you that it's the
British flag which is waving in Japan
and not the
Japanese the English have a treaty with
Japan for the sake of their Commerce and
you will see that if they can manage it
their Commerce will greatly expand in
that country they wish to convert the
whole world into a vast market for their
goods that they cannot do so is true but
the blame will not be theirs they'll
leave no stone unturn to reach the goal
end of chapter 7 why was India
lost chapter eight of hin araj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by aai in October
2015 hind swaraj or Indian home rule by
mandas karamchand Gandhi chapter 8 the
condition of India
reader I Now understand why the English
hold India I should like to know your
views about the condition of our
country editor it is a sad condition in
thinking of it my eyes water and my
throat get parched I have grave doubts
whether I shall be able sufficiently to
explain what is in my heart it is my
deliberate opinion that India is being
ground down not under the English heel
but under that of modern
civilization it is groaning under the
monster's terrible weight there is yet
time to escape it but every day makes it
more and more difficult religion is dear
to me and my first complaint is that
India is becoming
irreligious here I am not thinking of
the Hindu and mohamedan or the
zoroastrian religion but of the religion
which underlies all religions we are
turning away from God
reader how
so
editor there is a charge laid against us
that we are a la people and that the
Europeans are industrious and
enterprising we have accepted the charge
and we therefore wish to change our
condition Hinduism islamism
Zoroastrianism Christianity and all
other religions teach that we should
remain passive about worldly Pursuits
and active about Godly Pursuits that we
should set a limit to our worldly
ambition and that our religious ambition
should be illimitable our activity
should be directed into the later
Channel reader you seem to be
encouraging religious
charlatanism many a cheat has by talking
in a similar strain led the people
astray editor you're bringing an
unlawful charge against religion humbug
there undoubtedly is about all religions
where there is light there is also
Shadow I am prepared to maintain that
humbugs in worldly matters are far worse
than the humbugs in religion the humbug
of civilization that I Endeavor to show
to you is not to be found in
religion reader how can you say that in
the name of religion Hindus and madans
fought against one another for the same
cause Christians fought Christians
thousands of innocent men have been
murdered thousands have been burned and
tortured in its name surely this is much
worse than any
civilization
editor I certainly submit that the above
hardships are far more bearable than
those of
civilization everybody understands that
the cruelties you have named are not
part of religion although they have been
practiced in its name therefore there is
no aftermath to these cruelties they
will always happen so long as there are
to be found ignorant and credulous
people but there is no end to the
victims destroyed in the fire of
civilization its deadly effect is that
people came under its scorching Flames
believing it to be all good they become
utterly irreligious and in reality
derive little Advantage from the World
Civilization is like a mouse gnawing
while it is soothing us when its full
effect is realized we will see that
religious Superstition is harmless
compared to that of modern
civilization I am not pleading for a
continuance of religious
superstitions we will certainly fight
them tooth and nail but we can never do
so by disregarding religion we can only
do so by appreciating and conserving the
letter reader then you will content that
the Pu britanica is a useless
incumbrance editor you may see PE if you
like I see
none reader you make light of the terror
that thugs the pindaris the bills were
to the
country
editor if you will give the matter some
thought you will see that the terror was
by no means such a mighty thing if it
had been a very substantial thing the
other people would have died away before
the English Advent moreover the present
piece is only nominal for by it we we
have become emasculated and
cowardly we are not to assume that the
English have changed the nature of the
pindaris and the beels it is therefore
better to suffer the pindari Peril than
that someone else should protect us from
it and thus render us
effeminate I should prefer to be killed
by the eror of a Beal than to seek
unmanly
protection India without such protection
was an India full of Valor mcau betrayed
gross ignorance when he Lial Indians as
being practically cowards they never
merited a charge cowards living in a
country inhabited by Hardy Mountaineers
Infested by wolves and tigers must Truly
find an early grave have you ever
visited our Fields I assure you that our
agriculturists sleep fearlessly on their
Farms even today and the English you and
I would hesitate to sleep where they
sleep strength lies in the absence of
fear not in the quantity of Flesh and
muscle we may have on our
bodies moreover I must remind you who
Desire home rule that after all the BS
the pindaris the asames and the thugs
are our own countrymen to conquer them
is your and my work so long as we fear
our own brethren we are unfit to reach
the
goal end of chapter 8
chapter nine of hind swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by a in October
2015 hind swaraj or Indian home rule by
m as karamchand Gandhi chapter 9 the
condition of India
continued
Railways
reader you have deprived me of the
consolation I used to have regarding
peace in
India
editor I have merely given you my
opinion on the religious aspect but when
I give you my views as to the poverty of
India you will perhaps begin to dislike
me because what you and I have hither to
considered beneficial for India no
longer appears to me to be
so reader what may that
be editor Railways lawyers and doctors
have impoverished the country so much of
that if we do not wake up in time we
shall be
ruined
reader I do now indeed fear that we are
not likely to agree at all you are
attacking the very institutions which we
have P to considered to be
good editor it is necessary to exercise
patience the true inwardness of the
evils of civilization you will
understand with difficulty doctors
assure us that a consumptive clings to
life even when he is about to die
consumption does not produce apparent
hurt it even produces a seductive color
about a patient's face so as to induce
the believe that all is well well
civilization is such a disease and we
have to be very
wary
reader very well then I shall hear you
on the
railways editor it must be manifest to
you that but for the railways the
English could not have such a hold on
India as they have the railways too have
spread the Bubonic plague without them
mes could not move from place to place
they are the carriers of plague germs
formerly we had natural
segregation Railways have also increased
the frequency of famines because owing
to facility of means of locomotion
people sell out their grain and it is
sent to the dearest markets people
become careless and so the pressure of
famine increases they accentuate the
evil nature of man bad men fulfill their
evil designs with greater rapidity
the holy places of India have become
Unholy formerly people went to these
places with very great difficulty
generally therefore only the real
devotees visited such
places nowadays Rogues visit them in
order to practice their
rogery
reader you have given an one-sided
account good men can visit these places
as well as bad men why do they not take
the fullest advantage of the
Railways
editor good travels at a snail's pace it
can therefore have little to do with the
railways those who want to do good are
not selfish they are not in a hurry they
know that to impregnate people with good
requires a long time but evil has wings
to build a house takes time its
destruction takes none so the railways
can become a Distributing Agency for the
E Vil one only it may be a debatable
matter whether Railways spread famines
but it is beyond dispute that they
propagate
evil
reader be that as it may all the
disadvantages of Railways are more than
counterbalanced by the fact that it is
due to them that we see in India the new
spirit of
nationalism editor I hold this to be a
mistake the English have taught us that
we were not one nation before and that
it will require centuries before we
become one nation this is without
Foundation we were one nation before
they came to India one thought inspired
us our mode of life was the same it was
because we were one nation that they
were able to establish one Kingdom
subsequently they divided
us reader this requires an
explanation edit
I do not wish to suggest that because we
were one nation we had no differences
but it is submitted that our Leading Men
traveled throughout India either on foot
or in bulock carts they learned one
another's languages and there was no
aloofness between them what do you think
could have been the intention of those
farseeing ancestors of ours who
established chindu rameswar in the south
jagot in the Southeast and hard war in
the North as places of
pilgrimage you will admit they were no
fools they knew that worship of God
could have been performed just as well
at home they taught us that those whose
Hearts were a glow with righteousness
had the Ganges in their own homes but
they saw that India was one undivided
land so made by Nature they therefore
argued that it must be one nation
arguing thus they established holy
places in various parts of India and
fired the people with an idea of
nationality in a manner unknown in other
parts of the world any two Indians are
one as no two Englishmen are only you
and I and others who consider ourselves
civilized and Superior persons imagine
that we are many nations it was after
the Advent of Railways that we began to
believe in distinctions and you are at
Liberty now to say that it is through
the railways that we are beginning to
abolish those
distinctions an opium eater May argue
the advantage of opium eating from the
fact that he began to understand the
evil of the Opium habit after having
eaten it I would ask you to consider
well what I have said on the
railways
reader I will gladly do so but one
question occurs to me even now you have
described to me the India of the Prem
muhammadan period
but now we have muhammadans pares and
Christians how can they be one nation
Hindus and mohammadans are old enemies
our very Proverbs prove it muhammadans
turn to the West for worship whilst
Hindus turn to the east the former look
down on the Hindus as
idolators the Hindus worship the cow the
muhammadans kill her the Hindus believe
in the doctrine of nonkilling the
muhammadans do not with us meet with
differences at every step how can India
be one
nation end of chapter
n chapter 10 of hind swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by aai in October
2015 Hindus or Indian home rule by
mandas karamchand Gandhi chapter 10 the
condition of India continued the Hindus
and the
muhammadans editor your last question is
a serious one and yet on careful
consideration it will be found to be
easy of solution
the question arises because of the
presence of the railways of the lawyers
and of the doctors we shall presently
examine the last two we have already
considered the
railways I should however like to add
that man is so made by Nature as to
require him to restrict his movements as
far as his hands and feet will take him
if we did not rush about from place to
place by means of Railways and such
other maddening convenience
much of the confusion that arises would
be
obviated our difficulties are of our own
creation God set a limit to a man's
locomotive ambition in the construction
of his body man immediately proceeded to
discover means of overriding the limit
God Gifted Man with intellect that he
might know his maker man abused it so he
might forget his maker I am so
constructed that I can only serve my
immediate neighbors but in my conceit I
pretend to have discovered that I must
with my budy serve every individual in
the
universe in thus attempting the
impossible man comes in contact with
different Natures different religions
and is utterly
confounded according to this reasoning
it must be apparent to you that Railways
are a most dangerous
institution man has there through gone
further away from his maker
reader but I am impatient to hear your
answer to my question has the
introduction of muhammadanism not unmade
the
nation
editor India cannot seize to be one
nation because people belonging to
different religions live in it the
introduction of foreigners does not
necessarily destroy the nation they
merge in it a country is One Nation only
when such a condition obtains in it that
country must have a faculty for
assimilation India has ever been such a
country in reality there are as many
religions as there are individuals but
those who are conscious of the spirit of
nationality do not interfere with one
another's religion if they do they are
not fit to be considered a
nation if the Hindus believe that India
should be people only by Hindus they are
living in
Dreamland the Hindus the muhammadans the
pares and the Christians who have made
India their country are fellow
countrymen and they will have to live in
unity if only for their own interest in
no part of the world are one nationality
and one religion synonymous terms nor
has it ever been so in
India
reader but what about the inborn enmity
between Hindus and
muhammadans editor that phrase has been
invented by our mutual enemy when the
Hindus and muhammadans fought against
one another they certainly spoke in that
strain they have long since ceased to
fight how then can there be any inborn
enmity pray remember this too that we
did not cease to fight only after
British
occupation the Hindus flourished under
Muslim sovereigns and Muslims under the
Hindu each party recognized that Mutual
fighting was suicidal and that neither
party would abandon its religion by
Force of
Arms both parties therefore decided to
live in peace with the English Advent
the quarrels
recommenced the Proverbs you have quoted
were coined when both were fighting to
quote them now is obviously harmful
should we not remember that many Hindus
and muhammadans own the same ancestors
and the same blood runs through their
veins do people become enemies because
they Chang their religion is the god of
the muhammadan different from the god of
the
Hindu religions are different roads
converging to the same point what does
it matter that we take different roads
as long as we reach the same goal
wherein is the cause for
quarreling moreover there are deadly
Proverbs as between the followers of
Shiva and those of Vishnu yet nobody
suggests that these two do not belong to
the same Nation it is said that the Vic
religion is different from jism but the
followers of the respective faiths are
not different
nations the fact is that we have become
enslaved and therefore quarrel and like
to have our quarrels decided by a third
party there are Hindu icono classs as
there are
muhammadan the more we advance in true
knowledge the better we shall understand
that we need not be at war with those
whose religion we may not follow
reader now I would like to know your
views about cow
protection editor I myself respect the
cow that is I look upon her with
affectionate reverence the cow is the
protector of India because it being an
agricultural country is dependent on the
cow's progeny she's a most useful animal
in hundreds of ways our mohammadan
Brethren will admit this but just as I
respect the cow so do I respect my
fellow men a man is just as useful as a
cow no matter whether he be a muhammadan
or a Hindu am I then to fight with or
kill a muhammadan in order to save a
cow in doing so I would become an enemy
as well of the cow as of the
muhammadan therefore the only method I
know of protecting the cow is that I
should approach my muhammadan brother
and urge him for sake of the country to
join me in protecting her if he would
not listen to me I should let the cow go
for the simple reason that the matter is
beyond my
ability if I were over full of pity for
the cow I should sacrifice my life to
save her but not take my brothers this I
hold is the law of our
religion when men become obstinate it is
a difficult thing if I pull one way my
Muslim brother will pull another if I
put on a superior air he will return the
compliment if I bow to him gently he
will do it much more so and if he does
not I shall not be considered to have
done wrong in having
bowed when the Hindus become insistent
the killing of cows
increased in my opinion cow protection
societies may be considered cow killing
societies it is a disgrace to us that we
should need
societies when we forgot how to protect
cows I suppose we needed such
societies what am I to do when a blood
brother is on the point of killing a cow
am I to kill him or to fall down at his
feet and implore him if you admit that I
should adopt the letter course I must do
the same to my Muslim brother who
protects the cow from destruction by
Hindus when they cruy ill treat her
whoever reason with the Hindus when they
mercilessly belabor the progeny of the
cow with their
sticks but this has not prevented us
from remaining One
Nation lastly if it be true that the
Hindus believe in the doctrine of
nonkilling and the mohammadans do not
what I pray is the duty of the
former is it not written that a follower
of the religion of aimsa nonkilling May
kill a fellow man for him the way is
straight
in order to save one being he may not
kill another he can only plead therein
lies his sole
duty but does every Hindu believe in
ahimsa going to the root of the matter
not one man really practices such a
religion because we do destroy life we
are said to follow that religion because
we want to obtain freedom from liability
to kill any kind of Life generally
speaking we May observe that many Hindus
partake of meat and are not therefore
followers of
ahimsa it is therefore Preposterous to
suggest that the two cannot live
together amicably because the Hindus
believe in ahimsa and the madans Do
Not these thoughts are put into our
minds by selfish and false religious
teachers the English put the Finishing
Touch they have a habit of writing
history they pretend to study the
manners and customs of All
Peoples God has given us a limited
mental capacity but they usurp the
function of the godhead and indulge in
novel
experiments they write about their own
researches in most latory terms and
hypnotize us into believing them we in
our ignorance then fall at their
feet those who do not wish to
misunderstand things may read up the
Quran and will find there in hundreds of
passages except acceptable to the Hindus
and the bhagavat Gita contains passages
to which not a muhammadan can take
exception am might to dislike a
muhammadan because there are passages in
the Quran I do not understand or like it
takes two to make a quarrel if I do not
want to quarrel with a muhammadan the
latter will be powerless to voice the
quarrel on me and similarly I should be
powerless if a muhammadan refuses his
assistance to quarrel with me and arm
striking the air will become
disjointed if everyone will try to
understand the core of his own religion
and adhere to it and will not allow
false teachers to dictate to him there
will be no room left for
quarreling reader but will the English
ever allow the two buddies to join
hands
editor this question arises out of your
timidity it betrays our shallowness
if two brothers want to live in peace is
it possible for a third party to
separate them if they were to listen to
evil counsels we would consider them to
be
foolish similarly we Hindus and
muhammadans would have to blame our
Folly rather than the English if we
allowed them to put us
aunder a clay pot would break through
impact if not with one stone than with
another the way to save the pot is not
to keep it away from the danger point
but but to bake it so that no stone
would break it we have then to make our
hearts to perfectly baked clay then we
shall be stealed against all danger this
can be easily done by the Hindus they
are superior in numbers they pretend
that they are more educated they are
therefore better able to Shield
themselves from Attack on their amicable
relations with the
muhammadans there is mutual distrust
between the two communities
the muhammadans therefore ask for
certain concessions from Lord Morley why
should the Hindus oppose this if the
Hindus desisted the English would notice
it the muhammadans would gradually begin
to trust the Hindus and brotherliness
would be the outcome we should be
ashamed to take our quarrels to the
English everyone can find out for
himself that the Hindus can lose Nothing
by
desisting that man who has inspired
confidence in another has never lost
anything in this
world I do not suggest that the Hindus
and the muhammadans will never fight two
brothers living together often do so we
shall sometimes have our heads broken
such a thing ought not to be necessary
but all men are not equal minded when
people are in a rage they do many
foolish things these we have to put up
with but when we do quarrel we certainly
do not not want to engage Council and to
resort to English or any Law Courts two
men fight both have their heads broken
or one only how shall a third party
distribute Justice amongst them those
who fight may expect to be
injured end of chapter
10 chapter 11 of hind swaraj or Indian
home ru
this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by AA in October
2015 Hindu swaraj or Indian home rule by
mandas karamchand Gandhi chapter 11 the
condition of India
continued lawyers
reader you tell me that when two men
quarrel they should not go to a law
Court this is
astonishing editor whether you call it
astonishing or not it is the truth and
your question introduces us to the
lawyers and the doctors my firm opinion
is that the lawyers have enslaved India
and they have accentuated their Hindu
mahaman dissensions and have confirmed
English Authority
reader it is easy enough to bring these
charges but it will be difficult for you
to prove them but for the lawyers who
would have shown us the road to
Independence who would have protected
the poor who would have secured
Justice for instance the late Mr
manomohan goes defended many a poor man
free of charge the Congress which you
have praised so much is dependent for
its existence and activity upon the work
of the lawyer
to denounce such an estimable class of
men is to spell justice injustice and
you are abusing the liberty of the press
by De crying
lawyers
editor at one time I used to think
exactly like you I have no desire to
convince you that they have never done a
single good thing I honor Mr Go's memory
it is quite true that he helped the poor
that the Congress owes the lawyers
something is beli able lawyers are also
men and there is something good in every
man whenever instances of lawyers having
done good can be brought forward it will
be found that the good is due to them as
men rather than as lawyers all I am
concerned with is to show you that a
profession teaches immorality it is
exposed to Temptations from which few
are
saved the Hindus and the muhammadans
have quarreled an ordinary man will ask
them to forget all about it he will tell
them that both must be more or less at
fault and will advise them no longer to
quarrel they go to lawyers the Letter's
duty is to side with their clients and
to find out ways and arguments in favor
of the clients to which they the clients
are often
strangers if they do not do so they will
be considered to have degraded their
profession the lawyers therefore will as
a rule advance quarrels instead of
repressing them moreover men take up
that profession not in order to help
others out of their miseries but to
enrich themselves it is one of the
Avenues of becoming wealthy and their
interest exists in multiplying
disputes it is within my knowledge that
they are glad when men have disputes
Petty pleaders actually manufacture them
their touts like so many leeches suck
the blood of the poor people lawyers are
men who have little to do lazy people in
order to indulge in luxuries take up
such
professions this is a true statement any
other argument is a mere pretension it
is the lawyers who have discovered that
theirs is an honorable profession they
frame laws as they frame their own
Praises they decide what fees they will
charge and they put on so much side that
poor people almost consider them to be
heav heaven
born why do they want more fees than
common laborers why are their
requirements greater in what way are
they more profitable to the country than
the
laborers are those who do good entitled
to Greater payment and if they have done
anything for the country for the sake of
money how shall it be counted as
good those who know anything of the
Hindu muhammadan quarrels know that they
have been often due to the intervention
of
lawyers some families have been ruined
through them they have made Brothers
enemies principalities having come under
lawyer's power have become loaded with
debt many have been robbed of their all
such instances can be
multiplied but the greatest injury they
have done to the country is that they
have tightened the English grip do you
think it would be possible for the
English to carry on their government
without Law Courts
it is wrong to consider that courts are
established for the benefit of the
people those who want to perpetuate
their power do so through the
courts if people were to settle their
own quarrels a third party would not be
able to exercise any authority over them
truly men were less unmanly when they
settled their disputes either by
fighting or by asking their relatives to
decide upon them they became more
unmanly and cowardly when they resorted
to the courts of law it was certainly a
sign of savagery when they settled their
disputes by fighting is it any the less
so if I ask a third party to decide
between you and me surely the decision
of a third party is not always right the
parties alone know who is right we in
our Simplicity and ignorance imagine
that a Stranger by taking our money
gives us
Justice the chief thing however to be
remembered is that without lawyers
courts could not have been established
or conducted and without the letter the
English could not rule Suppose there
were only English judges English
pleaders and English police they could
only rule over the English the English
could not do without Indian judges and
Indian
pleaders how the pleaders were made in
the first instance and how they were
favored you should understand well then
you will have the same abhorrence for
the profession that I I have if pleaders
were to abandon their profession and
consider it just as degrading as
prostitution English rule would break up
in a day they have been instrumental in
having the charge laid against us that
we love quarrels and courts as fish love
water what I have said with reference to
the pleaders necessarily applies to the
judges they are first cousins and the
one gives strength to the
other end of chapter
11 chapter 12 of hind swaraj or Indian
home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by AI in October
2015 hin swaraj or Indian home rule by
mandas karamchand
Gandhi chapter 12 the condition of India
continued
doctors reader I Now understand the
lawyers the good they may have done is
accidental I feel that the profession is
certainly hateful you however drag in
these doctors also how is
that
editor the views I submit to you are
those I have adopted they are not
original Western writers have used
stronger terms regarding both lawyers
and doctors one writer has likened the
whole modern system to the upas tree its
branches are represented by parasitical
professions including those of Law and
medicine and over the trunk has been
raised the AXS of True Religion
immorality is the root of the tree so
you will see that the views do not come
right out of my mind but they represent
the combined experiences of many I was
at one time a great lover of the medical
profession it was my intention to become
a doctor for the sake of the country I
no longer hold that opinion I Now
understand why the medicine men the
vaids Among Us have not occupied a very
honorable
status the English have certainly
effectively used the medical profession
for holding us English Physicians are
known to have used the profession with
several Asiatic potentates for political
gain doctors have almost unhinged us
sometimes I think that quacks are better
than highly qualified
doctors let us consider the business of
a doctor is to take care of the body or
properly speaking not even that their
business is really to rid the body of
diseases that may afflict it how do
these diseases arise surely by our
negligence or Indulgence
I overeat I have indigestion I go to a
doctor he gives me
medicine I am cured I overeat again and
I take his pills again had I not taken
the pills in the first instance I would
have suffered the punishment deserved by
me and I would not have overeaten again
the doctor intervened and helped me to
indulge myself my body thereby certainly
felt more at ease but my mind became
weakened a continuance of a course of a
medicine must therefore result in loss
of control over the
mind I have indulged in Vice I contract
a disease a doctor cures me the odds are
that I shall repeat the vice had the
doctor not intervened nature would have
done its work and I would have acquired
Mastery over myself would have been free
from Vice and would have become
happy hospitals are institutions for
propagating sin men take less care of
their bodies and immorality
increases European doctors are the worst
of all for the sake of a mistaken care
of the human body they kill annually
thousands of animals they practice vivis
section no religion sanctions this all
say that it is not necessary to take so
many lives for the sake of our
bodies these doctors violate our
religious instinct most of their medical
preparations contain either animal fat
or spirituous Liquors both of these are
tabooed by Hindus and
muhammadans we may pretend to be
civilized call religious prohibitions a
Superstition and wanly indulge in what
we like the fact remains that the
doctors indued us to indulge and the
result is that we have become deprived
of self-control and have become
effeminate in these circumstances we are
unfit to serve of the country to study
European medicine is to deepen our
slavery it is worth considering why we
take up the profession of medicine it is
certainly not taken up for the purpose
of serving
Humanity we become doctors so that we
may obtain honors and
riches I have endeavored to show that
there is no real service of humanity in
the profession and that it is injurious
to
mankind doctors make a show of their
know and charge exorbitant fees their
preparations which are intrinsically
worth a few pennies cost Shillings the
populace in its credulity and in the
hope of ridding itself of some disease
allows itself to be
cheated are not quacks then whom we know
better than the doctors who put on an
air of humaneness
end of chapter 12
chapter 13 of hin swaraj or Indian home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Richard ship hin swaraj or
Indian home rule by mandas karamchand
gandi chapter
13 what is true
civilization
reader you have denounced Railways
lawyers and doctors I can see that you
will discard all
Machinery what then is
civilization
editor the answer to that question is
not difficult I believe that the
civilization India has evolved is not to
be beaten in the world nothing can equal
the seeds sewn by by our
ancestors Rome went Greece shared the
same fate the might of the Pharaohs was
broken Japan has become westernized of
China nothing can be said but India is
still somehow or other sound at the
foundation the people of Europe learned
their lessons from the writings of the
men of Greece or Rome which exist no
longer in their former glory in trying
to learn from them the Europeans imagine
that they will avoid the mistakes of
Greece and Rome such is their pitiable
condition in the midst of all this India
remains immovable and that is her glory
it is a charge against India that her
people are so uncivilized ignorant and
stolid that it is not possible to induce
them to adopt any
changes it is a charge really against
our Merit what we have tested and found
true on the Anvil of experience we dare
not
change many thrust their advice upon
India and she remains steady this is her
beauty it is the sheet anchor of Our
Hope civilization is that mode of
conduct which points out to man The Path
of Duty performance of Duty and
observance of morality are convertible
terms to observe morality is to attain
Mastery over our mind and our passions
so do we know ourselves the Gujarati
equivalent for civilization means Good
Conduct if this definition be correct
then India as so many writers have shown
has nothing to learn from anybody else
and this is as it should be we notice
that mind is a Restless bird the more it
gets the more it wants and Still Remains
unsatisfied the more we indulge our
passions the more unbridled they become
our ancestors therefore set a limit to
our
indulgences they saw that happiness was
largely a mental condition a man is not
necessarily happy because he is Rich or
unhappy because he is poor the rich are
often seem to be unhappy the poor to be
happy Millions will always remain poor
observing all this our ancestors
dissuaded us from luxuries and Pleasures
we have managed with the same kind of
plow as it existed thousands of years
ago we have retained the same kind of
cottages that we had in former times and
our indigenous education Remains the
Same as before we have had no system of
Life corroding competition each followed
his own occupational trade and charged a
regulation wage it was not that we did
not know how to invent Machinery but our
forefathers knew that if we set our
hearts after such things we would become
slaves and lose our moral fiber they
therefore after due deliberation decided
that we should only do what we could
with our hands and feet they saw that
our real happiness and health consisted
in a proper use of our hands and feet
they further reasoned that large cities
were a snare and a useless encumbrance
and that people would not be happy in
them that there would be gangs of
Thieves and robbers prostitution and
Vice flourishing in them and that poor
men would be robbed by rich men they
were therefore satisfied with small
villages they saw that Kings and their
swords were inferior to the sword of
ethics and they therefore held the
sovereigns of the earth to be inferior
to the rishes and the
fakers a nation with a constitution like
this is fitter to teach others than to
learn from others this nation had courts
lawyers and doctors but they were all
within in bounds everybody knew that
these professions were not particularly
Superior moreover these vils and vids
did not rob people they were considered
people's dependents not their masters
Justice was tolerably fair the ordinary
rule was to avoid courts there were no
TS to lure people into them this evil
too was noticeable only in and around
capitals the Common People Liv lived
independently and followed their
agricultural occupation they enjoyed
true home
rule and where this cursed modern
civilization has not reached India
remains as it was before the inhabitants
of that part of India will very properly
laugh at your new fangled Notions the
English do not rule over them nor will
you ever rule over them those whose name
we speak we do not know nor do they know
I would certainly advise you and those
like you who love the motherland to go
into the interior that has yet not been
polluted by the railways and to live
there for 6 months you might then be
patriotic and speak of home rule now you
see what I consider to be real
civilization those who want to change
conditions such as I have described are
enemies of the country and our
Sinners reader it would be all right if
India were exactly as you have described
it but it is also India where there are
hundreds of child widows where 2ear old
babies are married where 12-year-old
girls are mothers and Housewives where
women practice polyandry where the
practice of neog obtains where in the
name of religion girls dedicate
themselves to prostitution and where in
the name of religion sheep and goats are
killed do consider these also symbols of
the civilization that you have
described editor you make a mistake the
defects that you have shown are defects
nobody mistakes them for ancient
civilization they remain in spite of it
attempts have always been made and will
be made to remove them we may utilize
the new spirit that is born in us for
purging ourselves of these evils but
what I have described to you as emblems
of modern civilization are accepted as
such by its voies the Indian
civilization as described by me has been
so described by its voies in no part of
the world and under no civilization have
all men attained Perfection the tendency
of Indian civilization is to elevate the
moral being that of the western
civilization is to propagate
immorality the latter is Godless the
former is based on a belief in God
so understanding and so believing it
behoves every lover of India to cling to
the old Indian civilization even as a
child clings to its mother's breast end
of chapter
13 chapter 14 of hin swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
or lib liox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Richard
ship hin suage or Indian home rule by
mandas karamchand
Gandhi chapter
14 how can India become
free
reader I appreciate your views about
civilization I will have to think over
them I cannot take in all at once what
then holding the views you do would you
suggest for freeing
India
editor I do not expect My Views to be
accepted all of a sudden my duty is to
place them before readers like yourself
time can be trusted to do the
rest we have already examined the
conditions for freeing India but we have
done so indirectly
we will now do so directly it is a
world-known maxim that the removal of
the cause of a disease results in the
removal of the disease
itself similarly if the cause of India's
slavery be removed India can become
free
reader if Indian civilization is as you
say the best of all how do you account
for India's
slavery editor this civiliz ation is
unquestionably the best but it is to be
observed that all civilizations have
been on their trial that Civilization
which is permanent outlives it because
the sons of India were found wanting its
civilization has been placed in Jeopardy
but its strength is to be seen in its
ability to survive the shock moreover
the whole of India is not touched those
alone who have been affected by Western
Civilization have been become enslaved
we measure the universe by our own
miserable foot rule when we are slaves
we think that the whole universe is
enslaved because we are in an abject
condition we think that the whole of
India is in that condition as a matter
of fact it is not so but it is as well
to impute our slavery to the whole of
India but if we bear in mind the above
fact we can see that if we become free
India is is free and in this s you have
a definition of
sarage it is swaraj when we learn to
rule ourselves it is therefore in the
palm of our hands do not consider this
sarage to be like a dream hence there is
no idea of sitting still the sarage that
I wish to picture before you and me is
such that after we have once realized it
we will endeavor to the end of our
lifetime to persuade others to do
likewise but such sarage has to be
experienced by each one for himself one
drowning man will never save another
slaves ourselves it would be a mere
pretension to think of freeing others
now you would have seen that it is not
necessary for us to have as our goal the
expulsion of the English if the English
become indianized we can accommodate
them if they wish to remain in India
along with their civilization there is
no room for them it lies with us to
bring about such a state of things
reader it is impossible that Englishmen
should ever become
indianized Editor to say that is
equivalent to saying that the English
have no Humanity in them and it is
really beside the point whether they
become so or not if we keep our own
house in order only those who are fit to
live in it will remain others will leave
of their own accord
such things occur within the experience
of all of us reader but it has not
occurred in history Editor to believe
that what has not occurred in history
will not occur at all is to argue
disbelief in the Dignity of man at any
rate it behoves us to try what appeals
to our reason all countries are not
similarly conditioned the condition of
India is unique its strength is
immeasurable we need not therefore refer
to the history of other countries I have
drawn attention to the fact that when
other civilizations have succumbed the
Indians have survived many a shock
reader I cannot follow this there seems
little doubt that we shall have to expel
the English by Force of Arms so long as
they are in the country we cannot rest
one of our poets says that slaves cannot
even dream of Happiness we are day by
day becoming weakened o to the presence
of the English our greatness is gone our
people look like terrified men the
English are in the country like a blight
which we must remove by every
means editor in your excitement you have
forgotten all we have been considering
we brought the English and we keep them
why do you forget that our adoption of
their civilization makes their presence
in India at all possible your hatred
against them ought to be transferred to
their
civilization but let us assume that we
have to drive away the English by
fighting how is that to be done reader
in the same way as Italy did it what it
was possible for mazini and Gary baly to
do is possible for us you cannot deny
that they were very great
men end of chapter 14
chapter 15 of hin swaraj or Indian home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Richard ship hin sorage or
Indian home rule by mandas karamchand
Gandhi chapter 15 Italy and India editor
it is well that you have instanced Italy
matsen was a great and good man Gary
baly was a great warrior both are
adorable from their lives we can learn
much but the condition of Italy was
different from that of India in the
first instance the difference between
mansini and Garibaldi is worth noting
mattin's ambition was not and has not
yet been realized regarding Italy macini
has shown in his writings on the duty of
man that every man must learn how to
rule himself this has not happened in
Italy Gary Baldi did not hold this view
of matsin Garibaldi gave and every
Italian took arms Italy and Austria had
the same civilization they were cousins
in this respect it was a matter of Tit
for Tat galdi simply wanted Italy to be
free from the Austrian yoke the
machinations of Minister cavor disgrace
that portion of the history of Italy and
what has been the result if you believe
that because Italians are all Italy the
Italian nation is happy you are groping
in
darkness macini has shown conclusively
that Italy did not become free Victor
Emanuel gave one meaning to the
expression matsin gave another according
to Emanuel Cavo and even Gary Baldi
Italy meant the king of Italy and his
henchmen according to mazini it meant
the whole of the Italian people that is
his
agriculturalists Emmanuel was only its
servant the Italy of matsin Still
Remains in a state of slavery at the
time of the so-called National War it
was a game of chess between two rival
Kings with the people of Italy as porns
the working classes in that land are
still unhappy they therefore indulge in
Assassin ation rise in Revolt and
Rebellion on their part is always
expected what substantial gain did Italy
obtain after the withdrawal of the
Austrian troops the gain was only
nominal the reforms for the sake of
which the war was supposed to have been
undertaken have not yet been granted the
condition of the people in general Still
Remains the Same I'm sure you do not
wish to reproduce such a condition in
India I believe that you want the
millions of IND to be happy not that you
want the Reigns of government in your
hands if that be so we have to consider
only one thing how can the millions
obtain self-rule you will admit that
people under several Indian princes are
being ground down the latter mercilessly
crush them their tyranny is greater than
that of the English and if you want such
tyranny in India that we shall never
agree my patriotism does not teach me
that I am to allow people to be crushed
under the heel of Indian princes if only
the English retire if I have the power I
should resist the tyranny of Indian
princes just as much as that of the
English by patriotism I mean the Ware of
the whole people and if I could secure
it at the hands of the English I should
bow down my head to them if any
Englishman dedicated his life to
securing the freedom of India resisting
tyranny and serving the land I should
welcome that Englishman as an Indian
again India can fight like Italy only
when she has arms you have not
considered this problem at all the
English are splendidly armed that does
not frighten me but it is clear to fit
ourselves against them in arms thousands
of Indians must be armed if such a thing
be possible how many years will it take
moreover to arm India on a large scale
is to European I it then her condition
will be just as pitiable as that of
Europe this means in short that India
must accept European civilization and if
that is what we want the best thing is
that we have Among Us those who are so
well trained in that Civilization we
will then fight for a few rights we'll
get what we can and so pass our days but
the fact is that the Indian Nation will
not adopt arms and it is well that it
does not reader you are over assuming
facts all need not be armed at first we
will assassinate a few Englishmen and
strike Terror then a few men who will
have been armed will fight openly we may
have to lose a quarter of a million men
more or less but we will regain our land
we will undertake Guerilla Warfare and
defeat the English editor that is to say
you want to make the holy land of India
Unholy do you not tremble to think of
freeing India by assassination what we
need to do is to kill ourselves it's a
cowardly thought that of killing others
whom do you suppose to Free by
assassination the millions of India do
not desire it those who are Intoxicated
by The Wretched modern civilization
think of these things those who will
rise the power by murder will certainly
not make the nation happy those who
believe that India has gained by ding's
act and such other acts in India make a
serious mistake dingra was a patriot but
his love was blind he gave his body in a
wrong way its ultimate result can only
be
mischievous reader but you will admit
that the English have been frightened by
these murders and that Lord Morley's
reforms are due to fear editor the
English are both a timid and a brave
Nation she is I believe easily
influenced by the use of gunpowder it is
possible that Lord moley has granted the
reforms through fear but what is granted
under fear can be retained only so long
as the fear
lasts end of chapter
15 chapter 16 of hind swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Maria
Casper hind swaraj or Indian home rule
by mandes karamchand
Gandhi chapter 16 Brute
Force
reader this is a new doctrine that what
is gained through fear is retained only
while the fear lasts surely what is
given will not be
withdrawn
editor not so the proclamation of 1857
was given at the end of a revolt and for
the purpose of preserving peace when
peace was secured and people became
simple-minded its full effect was toned
down if I ceased stealing for fear of
punishment I would recommence the
operation so soon as the fear is
withdrawn from me this is almost a
universal experience we have assumed
that we can get men to do things by
force and therefore we use
Force
reader will you not admit that you are
arguing against yourself you know that
what the English obtained in their own
country they have obtained by using
Brute Force I know you have argued that
what they have obtained is useless but
that does not affect my argument they
wanted useless things and they got them
my point is that their desire was
fulfilled what does it matter what means
they adopted why should we not obtain
our goal which is good by any means
whatsoever even by using violence shall
I think of the means when I have to deal
with a thief in the house my duty is to
drive him out anyhow you seem to admit
that we have received nothing and that
we shall receive Nothing by petition
why then may we not do so using brute
force and to retain what we may receive
we shall keep up the fear by using the
same Force to the extent that it may be
necessary you will not find fault with a
continuance of force to prevent a child
from thrusting its foot into a fire
somehow or other we have to gain our
end editor your reasoning is plausible
it has deluded many I have used similar
arguments before now but I think I know
better now and I shall Endeavor to
undeceive you let us first take the
argument that we are justified in
gaining our end by using Brute Force
because the English gained theirs by
using similar means it is perfectly true
that they used brute force and that it
is possible for us to do likewise but by
using similar means we can get only the
same thing that they got you you will
admit that we do not want that your
belief that there is no connection
between the means and the end is a great
mistake through that mistake even men
who have been considered religious have
committed Grievous crimes your reasoning
is the same as saying that we can get a
rose through planting a noxious
weed if I want to cross the ocean I can
do so only by means of a vessel if I
were to use a cart for that purpose both
the cart and I would soon find the
bottom as is the god so is the voter is
a maximum worth considering its meaning
has been distorted and men have gone
astray the means may be likened to a
seed the end to a tree and there is just
the same inviable connection between the
means and the end as there is between
the seed and the
tree I am not likely to obtain the
result flowing from the worship of God
by laying myself prostrate before Satan
if therefore anyone were to say I want
to worship God it does not matter that I
do so by means of Satan it would be set
down as ignorant Folly we reap exactly
as we sow the English in 1833 obtained
greater voting Power by violence did
they by using Brute Force better
appreciate their Duty they wanted the
right of voting which they obtained by
using physical Force
but real rights are the result of a
performance of Duty these rights they
have not obtained we therefore have
before us in England the force of
everybody wanting and insisting on his
rights nobody thinking of his duty and
where everybody wants rights who shall
give them and to whom I do not wish to
imply that they never perform their duty
but I do wish to imply that they do not
perform the duty to which those rights
should correspond
and as they do not perform that
particular Duty namely acquire Fitness
their rights have proved a burden to
them in other words what they have
obtained is an exact result of the means
they adopted they used the means
corresponding to the end if I want to
deprive you of your watch I shall
certainly have to fight for it if I want
to buy your watch I shall have to pay
you for it and if I want a gift I shall
have to plead for it and according to
the means I employ that watch is stolen
property my own property or a
donation thus we see three different
results from three different means will
you still say that means do not
matter now we shall take the example
given by you of the thief to be driven
out I do not agree with you that the
thief may be driven out by any means if
it is my father who has come to steal I
shall use one kind of means if it is an
acquaintance I shall use another and in
the case of a perfect stranger I shall
use a
third if it is a white man you will
perhaps say you will use means different
from those you will adopt with an Indian
Thief if it is a weakling the means will
be different from those to be adopted
for dealing with an equal in physical
strength and if the thief is armed from
tip to toe I shall simply remain quiet
thus we have a variety of means between
the father and the armed man again I
fancy that I should pretend to be
sleeping whether the thief was my father
or that strong armed man the reason for
this is that my father would also be
armed and I should succumb to the
strength possessed by either and allow
my things to be stolen the strength of
my father would make me weep with pity
the strength of the Armed man would
Rouse in me anger and we should become
enemies such is the Curious
situation from these examples we may not
be able to agree as to the means to be
adopted in each case I myself seem
clearly to see what should be done in
all these cases but the remedy May
frighten
you I therefore hesitate to place it
before you for the time being I will
leave you to guess it and if you cannot
it is clear that you will have to adopt
different means in each each case you
will also have seen that any means will
not Avail to drive away the thief you
will have to adopt means to fit each
case hence it follows that your duty is
not to drive away the thief by any means
you like let us proceed a little further
that a well-armed man has stolen your
property you have harbored the thought
you are filled with anger you argue that
you want to punish that Rogue not for
your own sake but for the good of your
neighbor
you have collected a number of armed men
you want to take his house by assault he
is duly informed of it he runs away he
too is incensed he collects his brother
robbers and sends you a defiant message
that he will commit robbery in broad
daylight you are strong you do not fear
Him you are prepared to receive him
meanwhile the robber pesters your
neighbors they complain before you you
reply that you are doing all for their
sake you do not mind that your own Goods
have been
stolen your neighbors reply that the
robber never pestered them before and
that he commenced his depredations only
after you declared hostilities against
him you are between Sila and caribdis
you are full of pity for the poor men
what they say is true what are you to do
you will be disgraced if you now leave
the robber alone you therefore tell the
poor men never mind come my wealth is
yours I will give you arms I will teach
you how to use them you should be labor
the Rogue don't you leave him alone and
so the battle grows the robbers increase
in number your neighbors have
deliberately put themselves to
inconvenience thus the result of wanting
to take revenge upon the robber is that
you have Disturbed your own peace you
are in Perpetual fear of being robbed
and assaulted your courage has given
place to coward this if you will
patiently examine the argument you will
see that I have not overdrawn the
picture this is one of the
means now let us examine the other you
set this Armed robber down as an
ignorant brother you intend to reason
with him at a suitable opportunity you
argue that he is after all a fellow man
you do not know what prompted him to
steal you therefore decide that when you
can you will destroy the man's motive
for stealing
whilst you are thus reasoning with
yourself the man comes again to steal
instead of being angry with him you take
pity on him you think that this stealing
habit must be a disease with him
henceforth you therefore keep your doors
and windows open you change your
sleeping place and you keep your things
in a manner most accessible to him the
robber comes again and is confused as
all this is new to him nevertheless he
takes away your things but his mind is
agitated he inquires about you in the
village he comes to learn about your
Broad and loving heart he repents he
begs your pardon returns you your things
and leaves off the stealing habit he
becomes your servant and you find for
him honorable
employment this is the second method
thus you see different means have
brought about totally different results
I do not wish to deduce from this that
robbers will act in the above manner or
that all will have the same pity and
love like you but I wish only to show
that only fair means can produce Fair
results and that at least in the
majority of cases if not indeed in all
the force of love and pity is infinitely
greater than the Force of Arms there is
harm in the exercise of Brute Force
never in that of pity
now we will take the question of
petitioning it is a fact Beyond dispute
that a petition without the backing of
force is
useless however the late Justice renad
used to say that petitions served a
useful purpose because they were a means
of educating people they give the latter
an idea of their condition and warn the
rulers from this point of view they are
not altogether
useless a petition of an equal is a sign
of Cur courtesy a petition from a slave
is a symbol of his slavery a petition
backed by force is a petition from an
equal and when he transmits his demand
in the form of a petition it testifies
to his
nobility two kinds of force can back a
petition we will hurt you if you do not
give this is one kind of force it is the
Force of Arms whose evil results we have
already
examined the second kind of force can be
thus stated if you do not concede to our
demand we will be no longer your
petitioners you can govern us only so
long as we Remain the governed we shall
no longer have any dealings with you the
force implied in this may be described
as love Force Soul force or more
popularly but less accurately passive
resistance this force is
indestructible he who uses it perfect L
understands his position we have an
ancient proverb which literally means
one negative cures 36
diseases the Force of Arms is powerless
when matched against the force of Love
or the
soul now we shall take your last
illustration that of the child thrusting
its foot into fire it will not Avail you
what do you really do to the child
supposing that it can exert so much
physical force that it renders you
powerless and rushes into fire then you
cannot prevent it there are only two
remedies open to you either you must
kill it in order to prevent it from
perishing in the Flames or you must give
your own life because you do not wish to
see it perish before your very eyes you
will not kill it if your heart is not
quite full of pity it is possible that
you will not surrender Yourself by
preceding the child and going into the
fire yourself you therefore helplessly
allow it to go into the
Flames thus at any rate you are not
using physical Force I hope you will not
consider that it is still physical Force
though of a low order when you would
forcibly prevent the child from rushing
toward the fire if you could that force
is of a different order and we have to
understand what it is remember that in
thus preventing the child you are
minding entirely its own interest you
are exercising a Authority for its sole
benefit your example does not apply to
the English in using Brute Force against
the English you consult entirely your
own that is the national interest there
is no question here either of pity or of
love if you say that the actions of the
English being evil represent fire and
that they proceed to their actions
through ignorance and that therefore
they occupy the position of a child and
that you want to protect such a child
then you will have to overtake every
such evil action by whomsoever committed
and as in the case of the child you will
have to sacrifice yourself if you are
capable of such immeasurable pity I wish
you well in its
exercise end of chapter
16 chapter 17 of hin SW
or Indian home rule this is a LibriVox
recording all LibriVox recordings are in
the public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org
recording by Maria
Casper hind swaraj or Indian home rule
by mandes karamchand
Gandhi chapter 17 passive
resistance reader is there is there any
historical evidence as to the success of
what you have called Soul force or truth
Force no instance seems to have happened
of Any Nation having risen through Soul
Force I still think that the evildoers
will not cease doing evil without
physical
punishment editor the poet tulsidas has
said of religion pity or love is the
root as egotism of the body therefore we
should not abandon in pity so long as we
are
alive this appears to me to be a
scientific truth I believe in it as much
as I believe in two and two being four
the force of Love is the same as the
force of the Soul or truth we have
evidence of its working at every step
the universe would disappear without the
existence of that
Force but you ask for historical
evidence it is therefore necessary to
know what history means the Gujarati
equivalent means it so happened if that
is the meaning of History it is possible
to give copious evidence but if it means
the doings of kings and Emperors there
can be no evidence of sole force or
passive resistance in such history you
cannot expect silver ore in a tin mine
history as we know it is a record of the
wars of the world and so there is a
proverb among Englishmen that a nation
which has no history that is no Wars is
a happy Nation how kings played how they
became enemies of one another and how
they murdered one another is found
accurately recorded in history and if
this were all that had happened in the
world it would have been ended long ago
if the story of the universe had
commenced with Wars not a man would have
been found alive
today those people who have been wared
against have disappeared as for instance
the natives of Australia of whom hardly
a man was Left Alive by The
Intruders Mark pleas that these natives
did not use Soul force in self-defense
and it does not require much foresight
to know that the Australians will share
the same fate as their victims those
that wield the sword Shall Perish by the
sword with us the proverb is that
professional swimmers will find a watery
grave the fact that there are so many
men still alive in the world shows that
it is based not not on the force of arms
but on the force of Truth Or Love
Therefore the greatest and most
unimpeachable evidence of the success of
this force is to be found in the fact
that in spite of the wars of the world
it still lives on thousands indeed tens
of thousands depend for their existence
on a very active working of this Force
little quarels and millions of families
in their daily lives disappear before
the exercise of this Force
hundreds of Nations live in peace
history does not and cannot take note of
this fact history is really a record of
every Interruption of the even working
of the force of Love or of the Soul two
brothers quarrel one of them repents and
reawakens the love that was lying
dormant in him the two again begin to
live in peace nobody takes note of this
but if the two brothers through the
intervention of solicitors or some other
reason take up arms or go to law which
is another form of the exhibition of
brute force their doings would be
immediately noticed in the Press they
would be the talk of their neighbors and
would probably go down to history and
what is true of families and communities
is true of Nations there is no reason to
believe that there is one law for
families and another for Nations history
then is a record of an interruption of
the course of nature
so Force being natural is not noted in
history
reader according to what you say it is
plain that instances of the kind of
passive resistance are not to be found
in
history it is necessary to understand
this passive resistance more fully it
will be better therefore if you enlarge
upon
it
editor passive resistance is a method of
securing rights by person
suffering it is the reverse of
resistance by arms when I refuse to do a
thing that is repugnant to my conscience
I use Soul Force for instance the
government of the day has passed a law
which is applicable to me I do not like
it if by using violence I force the
government to repeal the law I am
employing what may be termed body Force
if I do not obey the law and accept the
penalty for its breach I use Soul force
it involves sacrifice of
self everybody admits that sacrifice of
self is infinitely Superior to sacrifice
of others moreover if this kind of force
is used in a cause that is unjust only
the person using It suffers he does not
make others suffer for his
mistakes men have before now done many
things which were subsequently found to
have been wrong no man can claim to be
absolutely in the right or that a
particular thing is wrong because he
thinks so but it is wrong for him so
long as that is his deliberate judgment
it is therefore meat that he should not
do that which he knows to be wrong and
suffer the consequence whatever it may
be this is the key to the use of Soul
Force reader you would then disregard
laws this is rank disloyalty we have
always been considered a law abiding
Nation you seem to be going even beyond
the
extremists they say that we must obey
the laws that have been pass but that if
the laws be bad we must drive out the
lawgivers even by
force
editor whether I go beyond them or
whether I do not is a matter of no
consequence to either of us we simply
want to find out what is right and to
act
accordingly the real meaning of the
statement that we are a law-abiding
nation is that we are passive resistors
when we do not like certain laws we do
not break the heads of the lawgivers but
we suffer and do not submit to the laws
that we should obey laws whether good or
bad is a newfangled notion there was no
such thing in former days the people
disregarded those laws they did not like
and suffered the penalties for their
breach it is contrary to our manhood if
we obey laws repugnant to our conscience
such teaching is opposed to religion and
means
slavery if the government were to ask us
to go about without any clothing should
we do so if I were a passive resistor I
would say to them that I would have
nothing to do with their law but we have
so forgotten ourselves and become so
compliant that we do not mind any
degrading
law a man who has realized his manhood
who fears only God will fear no one else
man-made laws are not necessarily
binding on him even the government do
not expect any such thing from us they
do not say you must do such and such a
thing but they say if you do not do it
we will punish you we are sunk so low
that we fancy that it is our duty and
our religion to do what the law lays
down if man will only realize that it is
unmanly to obey laws that are unjust no
man's tyranny will enslave him this is
the key to self-rule or home rule it is
a Superstition and an ungodly thing to
believe that an act of a majority binds
a minority many examples can be given in
which acts of majorities will be found
to have been wrong and those of
minorities to have been right all
reforms owe their origin to the
initiation of minorities in opposition
to
majorities if among a band of robbers a
knowledge of robbing is obligatory is a
Pious man to accept that obligation so
long as the Superstition that men should
obey unjust laws exists so long will
their slavery exist and a passive
resistor alone can remove such a
Superstition to use brute force to use
gunpowder is contrary to passive
resistance for it means that we want our
opponent to do by force that which we
desire but he does not and if such a use
of force is justifiable surely he is
entitled to do likewise by us and so we
should never come to an agreement we may
simply fancy like the Blind Horse moving
in a circle round a mill that we are
making
progress those who believe that they are
not bound to obey laws which are
repugnant to their conscience have only
the remedy of passive resistance open to
them any other must lead to
disaster
reader from what you say I deduce that
passive resistance is a splendid weapon
of the weak but that when they are
strong they may take up
arms
editor this is gross ignorance passive
resistance that is soulle force is
matchless it is superior to the Force of
Arms how then can it be considered only
a weapon of the weak physical Force men
are strangers to the courage that is
requisite in a passive resistor do you
believe that a coward can ever disobey a
law that he
dislikes extremists are considered to be
Advocates of Brute Force why do they
then talk about obeying laws I do not
blame them they can say nothing else
when they succeed in driving out the
English and they themselves become
Governors they will want you and me to
obey their laws and that is a fitting
thing for their constit tion but a
passive resistor will say he will not
obey a law that is against his
conscience even though he may be blown
to pieces at the mouth of a cannon what
do you think wherein is courage required
in Blowing others to pieces from behind
a cannon or with a smiling face to
approach a cannon and be blown to Pieces
who is the true warrior he who keeps
death always as a bosom friend or he who
controls the death of others believe me
that a man devoid of courage and manhood
can never be a passive
resistor this however I will admit that
even a man weak in body is capable of
offering this resistance one man can
offer it just as well as Millions both
men and women can indulge in it it does
not require the training of an army it
needs no jiujitsu control over the mind
is alone necessary and when that is
attained man is free like the king of
the forest and his very glance Withers
the enemy passive resistance is an
all-sided sword it can be used anyhow it
blesses him who uses it and him against
whom it is used without drawing a drop
of blood it produces far-reaching
results it never rusts and cannot be
stolen competition between passive
resistors does not exhaust the sword of
passive resistance does not require a
Scabbard it is strange indeed that you
should consider such a weapon to be a
weapon merely of the
weak
reader you have said that passive
resistance is a specialty of India have
cannons never been used in
India
editor evidently in your opinion India
means its few princes to me it means its
teeming Millions on whom depends the
existence of its princes and our own
Kings will always use their kingly
weapons to use force is bred in them
they want to command but those who have
to obey commands do not want guns and
these are in a majority throughout the
world they have to learn either body
force or Soul Force when they learn the
former both the rulers and the ruled
become like so many Mad Men but where
they learn Soul Force the commands of
the r rers do not go beyond the point of
their swords for True men disregard
unjust
commands peasants have never been
subdued By The Sword and never will be
they do not know the use of the sword
and they are not frightened by the use
of it by others that nation is great
which rests its head upon death as its
pillow those who defy death are free
from all fear for those who are laboring
under the delusive charms of Brute Force
this picture is not overdrawn
the fact is that in India the nation at
large has generally used passive
resistance in all Departments of life we
cease to cooperate with our rulers when
they displease us this is passive
resistance I remember an instance when
in a small principality the villagers
were offended by some command issued by
the prince the former immediately began
vacating the village the prince became
nervous apologized to his subjects and
withdrew his command many such instances
can be found in India real home rule is
Possible only where passive resistance
is the guiding force of the people any
other rule is foreign
rule
reader then you will say that it is not
at all necessary for us to train the
body
editor I will certainly not say any such
thing it is difficult to become a
passive res sister unless the body is
trained as a rule the Mind residing in a
body that has become weakened by
pampering is also weak and where there
is no strength of Mind there can be no
strength of Soul we will have to improve
our physique by getting rid of infant
marriages and luxurious living if I were
to ask a man having a shattered body to
face a Cannon's mouth I would make of
myself a laughing
stock
reader from what you say then it would
appear that it is not a small thing to
become a passive resistor and if that is
so I would like you to explain how a man
may become a passive
resistor
Editor to become a passive resistor is
easy enough but it is also equally
difficult I have known a lad of 14 years
become a passive resistor I have known
also sick people doing likewise and I
have also known phys physically strong
and otherwise Happy people being unable
to take up passive
resistance after a great deal of
experience it seems to me that those who
want to become passive resistors for the
service of the country have to observe
perfect Chastity adopt poverty follow
truth and cultivate
fearlessness Chastity is one of the
greatest disciplines without which the
Mind cannot attain requisite firmness a
man who is
unchaste
instances what then is a married person
to do is the question that arises
naturally and yet it need not when a
husband and wife gratify the passions it
is no less an animal Indulgence on that
account such an Indulgence except for
perpetuating the race is strictly
prohibited but a passive resistor has to
avoid even that very limited Indulgence
because he can have no desire for
progyny a married man therefore can
observe perfect
Chastity this subject is not capable of
being treated at greater length several
questions arise how is one to carry
one's wife with one what are her rights
and other such questions yet those who
wish to take part in a great work are
bound to solve these
puzzles just as there is necessity for
Chastity so is there for poverty
pecuniary ambition and passive
resistance cannot well go together those
who have money are not expected to throw
it away but they are expected to be
indifferent about it they must be
prepared to lose every penny rather than
give up passive
resistance passive resistance has been
described in the course of our
discussion as truth Force truth
therefore has necessarily to be followed
and that at any cost in this connection
academic questions such as whether a man
may not lie in order to Save a Life Etc
arise but these questions occur only to
those who wish to justify
lying those who want to follow truth
every time are not placed in such a
quander and if they are they are still
saved from a false
position passive resistance cannot
proceed a step without
fearlessness those alone can follow the
path of passive resistance who are free
from Fear whether as to their
possessions false honor their relatives
the government bodily injuries
death these observances are not to be
abandoned in the belief that they are
difficult Nature has implanted in the
human breast ability to cope with any
difficulty or suffering that may come to
man unprovoked these these qualities are
worth having even for those who do not
wish to serve the country let there be
no mistake as those who want to train
themselves in the use of arms are also
obliged to have these qualities more or
less everybody does not become a warrior
for the wish a wouldbe warrior will have
to observe Chastity and to be satisfied
with poverty as his lot a Warrior
without fearlessness cannot be conceived
of it may be thought that he would not
need to be exactly truthful but that
quality follows real fearlessness when a
man abandons truth he does so owing to
fear in some shape or form the above
four attributes then need not frighten
anyone it may be as well here to note
that a physical Force man has to have
many other useless qualities which a
passive resistor never needs and you
will find that whatever extra effort a
swordsman needs is due to lack of
fearlessness
if he is an embodiment of the latter the
sword will drop from his hand that very
moment he does not need its support one
who is free from hatred requires no
sword a man with a stick suddenly came
face to face with a lion and
instinctively raised his weapon in
self-defense the man saw that he had
only praed about fearlessness when there
was none in him that moment he dropped
the stick and found himself free from
all fear
end of chapter
17 chapter 18 of hind swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Maria
Casper Hind swaj
or Indian home rule by mandes Karam
Chand Gandhi chapter 18
education reader in the whole of our
discussion you have not demonstrated the
necessity for Education we always
complain of its absence among us we
notice a movement for compulsory
education in our country the Maharaja of
gar has introduced it in his territories
every eye is directed towards them we
bless the Maharaja for it is all this
effort then of no use editor if we
consider our civilization to be the
highest I have regretfully to say that
much of the effort you have described is
of no use the motive of the Maharaja and
other great leaders who have been
working in this direction is perfectly
pure they therefore undoubtedly deserve
great praise but we cannot conceal from
ourselves the result that is like ly to
flow from their
effort what is the meaning of Education
if it simply means a knowledge of
letters it is merely an instrument and
an instrument may be well-used or abused
the same instrument that may be used to
cure a patient may be used to take his
life and so may a knowledge of letters
we daily observe that many men abuse it
and very few make good use of it and if
this is a correct statement we have
proved that more harm has been done by
it than good the ordinary meaning of
education is a knowledge of letters to
teach boys Reading Writing and
arithmetic is called primary education a
peasant earns his bread honestly he has
ordinary knowledge of the world he knows
fairly well how he should behave towards
his parents his wife his children and
his fellow villagers he understands and
observes the rules of morality
but he cannot write his own name what do
you propose to do by giving him a
knowledge of letters will you add an
inch to his happiness do you wish to
make him discontented with his Cottage
or his lot and even if you want to do
that he will not need such an
education Carried Away by the flood of
Western thought we came to the
conclusion without weighing pros and
cons that we should give this kind of
education to the
people now let let us take higher
education I have learned geography
astronomy algebra geometry Etc what of
that in what way have I benefited myself
or those around me why have I learned
these things Professor Huxley has thus
defined
education that man I think has had a
liberal education who has been so
trained in youth that his body is the
ready servant of his will and does with
ease and pleasure all the work that as a
mechanism it is capable of whose
intellect is a clear cold logic Engine
with all its parts of equal strength and
in smooth working order whose mind is
stored with a knowledge of the
fundamental truths of nature whose
passions are trained to come to heal by
a vigorous will the servant of a tender
conscience who has leared to hate all
viess and to respect others as
himself such an one and no other I
conceive has had a liberal education for
he is in harmony with nature he will
make the best of her and she of
him if this be true education I must
emphatically say that the Sciences I
have enumerated above I have never been
able to use for controlling my
senses therefore whether you take
Elementary education or higher education
it is not required for the main thing it
does not make of us men it does not
enable us to do our duty
Dy
reader if that is so I shall have to ask
you another question what enables you to
tell all these things to me if you had
not received higher education how would
you have been able to explain to me the
things that you
have
editor you have spoken well but my
answer is simple I do not for one moment
believe that my life would have been
wasted had I not received higher or
lower education
nor do I consider that I necessarily
serve because I speak but I do desire to
serve and in endeavoring to fulfill that
desire I make use of the education I
have received and if I am making good
use of it even then it is not for the
millions but I can use it only for such
as you and this supports my contention
both you and I have come under the bane
of what is mainly false education
I claim to have become free from its ill
effects and I am trying to give you the
benefit of my experience and in doing so
I am demonstrating the rottenness of
this
education moreover I have not run down a
knowledge of letters under all
circumstances all I have shown is that
we must not make of it a fetish it is
not our kuk in its place it can be of
use and it has its place when we have
brought our senses under subjection and
put our ethics on a firm foundation and
then if we feel inclined to receive an
education we may make good use of it as
an ornament it is likely to sit well on
us it now follows that it is not
necessary to make this education
compulsory our ancient school system is
enough character building has the first
place in it and that is primary
education a building erected on that
foundation will last
reader do I then understand that you do
not consider English education necessary
for obtaining home
rule
editor my answer is yes and no to give
Millions a knowledge of English is to
enslave them the foundation that mcau
laid of education has enslaved us I do
not suggest that he had any such
intention but that has been the result
is it not a sad commentary that we
should have to speak of home rule in a
foreign tongue and it is worthy of note
that the systems which the Europeans
have discarded are the systems in Vogue
Among Us their learned men continually
make changes we ignorantly adhere to
their castoff systems they are trying
each division to improve its own status
Wales is a small portion of England
great efforts are being made to revive a
knowledge of Welsh among welshmen the
English chancellor Mr Lloyd George is
taking a leading part in the movement to
make Welsh children speak Welsh and what
is our condition we write to each other
in faulty English and from this even our
Mas are not free our best thoughts are
expressed in English the proceedings of
our Congress are conducted in English
our best newspapers are printed in
English if this state of things
continues for a long time posterity will
it is my firm opinion condemn and curse
us it is worth noting that by receiving
English education we have Enslaved the
nation hypocrisy tyranny Etc have
increased English knowing Indians have
not hesitated to cheat and strike Terror
into the
people now if we are doing anything for
the people at all we are paying only a
portion of the debt due to them is it
not a most painful thing that if I want
to go to a court of justice must employ
the English language as medium that when
I become a barrister I may not speak my
mother tongue and that someone else
should have to translate to me from my
own language is not this absolutely
absurd is it not a sign of
slavery am I to blame the English for it
or myself it is we the English knowing
men that have enslaved India The Curse
Of The Nation will rest not upon the
English but upon
us I have told you that my answer to
your last question is both yes and no I
have explained to you why it is yes I
shall now explain why it is
no we are so much beset by the disease
of civilization that we cannot
altogether do without English
education those who have already
received it may make good use of it
wherever
necessary in our dealings with the
English people in our dealings with our
own people when we can only correspond
with them through that language and for
the purpose of knowing how much
disgusted they the English have
themselves become with their
civilization we may use or learn English
as the case may be those who have
studied English will have to teach
morality to their progyny through their
mother tongue and to teach them another
Indian language but when they have grown
up they may learn English the ultimate
aim being that we should not need it
the object of making money thereby
should be ued even in learning English
to such a limited extent we will have to
consider what we should learn through it
and what we should not it will be
necessary to know what Sciences we
should learn a little thought should
show you that immediately we cease to
care for English degrees the rulers will
prick up their
ears
reader then what education shall we give
editor
this has been somewhat considered above
but we will consider it a little more I
think that we have to improve all our
languages what subjects we should learn
through them need not be elaborated here
those English books which are valuable
we should translate into the various
Indian
languages we should abandon the
pretention of learning many
Sciences religious that is ethical
education will occupy the first place
every cultured Indian will know in
addition to his own provincial language
if a Hindu Sanskrit if a muhammadan
Arabic if a Pari Persian and all Hindi
some Hindus should know Arabic and
Persian some mohammadans and parses
Sanskrit several Northerners and
westerners should learn Tamil a
universal language for India should be
Hindi with the option of writing it in
Persian or nagri
characters in order that the Hindus and
the muhammadans may have closer
relations it is necessary to know both
the
characters and if we can do this we
shall Drive the English language out of
the field in a short time all this is
necessary for us slaves through our
slavery the nation has been enslaved and
it will be free with our
freedom reader the question of religious
education is very difficult
difficult editor yet we cannot do
without it India will never be Godless
rank atheism cannot flourish in that
land the task is indeed difficult my
head begins to turn as I think of
religious education our religious
teachers are hypocritical and selfish
they will have to be approached the
mulas the dors and the brahin hold the
key in their hands but if they will not
have the Good Sense the energy that we
have derived from English education will
have to be devoted to Religious
Education this is not very difficult
only The Fringe of the ocean has been
polluted and it is those who are within
the Fringe who alone need cleansing we
who come under this category can even
cleanse ourselves because my remarks do
not apply to the millions in order to
restore India to its pristine condition
we have to return to it in our own
civilization there will natur Al be
progress retrogression reforms and
reactions but one effort is required and
that is to drive out Western
Civilization all else will
follow end of chapter
18 chapter 19 of hind swaraj or Indian
home rule this is a LibriVox recording
all LibriVox recordings are in the in
the public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org
recording by Maria
Casper hind swaj or Indian home rule by
mandes Karam Chand Gandhi chapter 19
Machinery
reader when you speak of driving out
Western Civilization I suppose you will
also say that we want no
Machinery editor by raising this
question you have opened the wound I had
received when I read Mr Dot's economic
history of India I wept and as I think
of it again my heart sickens it is
Machinery that has impoverished India it
is difficult to measure the harm that
Manchester has done to us it is due to
Manchester that Indian handicraft has
all but
disappeared but I make a mistake how can
Manchester be blamed we wore Manchester
cloth and that is why Manchester woke it
I was delighted when I read about The
Bravery of Bengal there are no cloth
Mills in that presidency they were
therefore able to restore the original
handweaving
occupation it is true Bengal encourages
the mill industry of
Bombay if Bengal had proclaimed a
boycott of all machine-made Goods it
would have been much better Machinery
has begun to desolate Europe ruination
is now knocking at the English Gates Ma
Machinery is the chief symbol of modern
civilization it represents a great
sin the workers in the Mills of Bombay
have become slaves the condition of the
women working in these Mills is shocking
when there were no Mills these women
were not
starving if the Machinery craze grows in
our country it will become an unhappy
land it may be considered a heresy but I
am bound to say that it were better for
us to send money to Manchester and to
use flimsy Manchester cloth than to
multiply Mills in India by using
Manchester cloth we would only waste our
money but by reproducing Manchester in
India we shall keep our money at the
price of our blood because our very
moral being will be sapped and I call in
support of my statement the very Mill
hands as
Witnesses and those who have amassed
wealth out of factories are not likely
to be better than other rich men it
would be folly to assume that an Indian
Rockefeller would be better than the
American Rockefeller an impoverished
India can become free but it will be
hard for an India made Rich through
immorality to regain its freedom I fear
we will have to admit that moneyed men
support British rule their interest is
bound up with its stability money
renders a man helpless the other thing
is as harmful as sexual vice both are
poison a snake bite f is lesser poison
than these two because the former merely
destroys the body but the latter
destroys body mind and soul we need not
therefore be pleased with the prospect
of the growth of the mill
industry
reader are the Mills then to be closed
down
editor that is difficult it is no easy
task to do away with the thing that is
established we therefore say that the
non- beginning of a thing is supreme
wisdom we cannot condemn Mill owners we
can but pity them it would be too much
to expect them to give up their Mills
but we may implore them not to increase
them if they would be good they would
gradually contract their business they
can establish in thousands of households
the ancient and sacred handlooms and
they can buy out the cloth that may be
thus woven whether the mill owners do
this or not people can cease to use
machine-made
Goods
reader you have so far spoken about
machine-made cloth but there are
innumerable machine-made things we have
either to import them or to introduce
Machinery into our
country
editor indeed our Gods even are made in
Germany what need then to speak of
matches pins and
glasswar my answer can be only one what
did India do before these articles were
introduced precisely the same should be
done today as long as we cannot make
pins without Machinery so long will we
do without them the tinsel Splendor of
glassware we will have nothing to do
with and we will make Wicks as of old
with homegrown cotton and use handmade
earn saucers for lamps so doing we shall
save our eyes and money and will support
swadesi and so shall we attain home rule
it is not to be conceived that all men
will do all these things at one time or
that some men will give up all
machine-made things at once but if the
thought is sound we will always find out
what we can give up and will gradually
cease to use this what a few may do
others will copy and the movement will
grow like the coconut of the
mathematical problem what the leaders do
the populace will gladly follow the
matter is neither complicated nor
difficult you and I shall not wait until
we can carry others with us those will
be the losers who will not do it and
those who will not do it although they
can appreciate the truth will deserve to
be called
cowards
reader what then of the tram cars and
electricity
editor this question is now too late it
signifies nothing if we are to do
without the railways we shall have to do
without the tram cars Machinery is like
a snake hole which may contain from one
to 100 snakes where there is Machinery
there are large cities and where there
are large cities there are tram cars and
Railways and there only does one see
electric light english Villages do not
boast of any of these things honest
Physicians will tell you that we're
means of artificial Locomotion have
increased the health of the people has
suffered I remember that when in a
European town there was a scarcity of
money the receipts of the Tramway
company of the lawyers and of the
doctors went down and the people were
less
unhealthy I cannot recall a single good
point in connection with Machinery books
can be written to demonstrate its
evils reader is it a good point or a bad
one that all you are saying will be
printed through
Machinery editor this is one of those
instances which demonstrate that
sometimes poison is used to kill poison
this then will not be a good point
regarding Machinery as it expires the
Machinery as it were says to us beware
and avoid me you will derive no benefit
from me and the benefit that may acre
from printing will Avail only those who
are infected with the Machinery
craze do not therefore forget the main
thing it is necessary to realize that
machine is bad we shall then be able
gradually to do away with it Nature has
not provided any way whereby we may
reach a desired goal all of a sudden If
instead of welcoming Machinery as a boon
we would look upon it as an evil it
would ultimately
go end of chapter
19 chapter 20 of hind SW
or Indian home rule this is a LibriVox
recording all LibriVox recordings are in
the public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org
recording by Maria
Casper hind swaraj or Indian home rule
by mandes Karam Chand Gandhi chapter 20
conclusion reader from your views I
gather that you would form a third party
you are neither an extremist nor a
moderate editor that is a mistake I do
not think of a third party at all we do
not all think alike we cannot say that
all the moderates hold identical views
and how can those who want to serve only
have a party I would serve both the
moderates and the extremists where I
should differ from them I would
respectfully place my position before
them and continue my service
reader what then would you say to both
the
parties
editor I would say to the extremists I
know that you want home rule for India
it is not to be had for your asking
everyone will have to take it for
himself what others get for me is not
home rule but foreign rule therefore it
would not be proper for you to say that
you have obtained home rule if you
expelled the English
I have already described the true nature
of home rule this you would never obtain
by Force of Arms brute force is not
natural to the Indian soil you will have
therefore to rely wholly on Soul force
you must not consider that violence is
necessary at any stage for reaching our
goal I would say to the moderates mere
petitioning is derogatory we thereby
confess inferiority to to say that
British rule is indispensable is almost
a denial of the godhead we cannot say
that anybody or anything is
indispensable except God moreover Common
Sense should tell us that to state that
for the time being the presence of the
English in India is a necessity is to
make them
conceited if the English vacated India
bag in baggage it must not be supposed
that she would be widowed it is possible
that those who are forced to observe
peace under their pressure would fight
after their withdrawal there can be no
advantage in suppressing an eruption it
must have its vent if therefore before
we can remain at peace we must fight
amongst ourselves it is better that we
do
so there is no occasion for a third
party to protect the weak it is this
so-called protection which has unnerved
us such protection can only make the
weak weaker unless we realize this we
cannot have home rule I would paraphrase
the thought of an English Divine and say
that anarchy under home rule were better
than orderly foreign rule only the
meaning that the Learned Divine attached
to home rule is different to Indian home
rule according to my
conception we have to learn and to teach
others that we do not want the tyranny
of their English rule or Indian rule if
this idea were carried out both the
extremists and the moderates could join
hands there is no occasion to fear or
distrust one
another
reader what then would you say to the
English
Editor to them I would respectfully say
I admit you are my rulers it is not
necessary to debate the question whether
you hold India by the sword or by my
consent I have no objection to your
remaining in my country but all although
you are the rulers you will have to
remain as Servants of the people it is
not we who have to do as you wish but it
is you who have to do as we wish you may
keep the riches that you have drained
away from this land but you may not
drain riches henceforth your function
will be if you so wish to police India
you must abandon the idea of deriving
any commercial benefit from us we hold
the civilization that you support to be
the reverse of civiliz ation we consider
our civilization to be far superior to
yours if you realize this truth it will
be to your advantage and if you do not
according to your own proverb you should
only live in our country in the same
manner as we do you must not do anything
that is contrary to our religions it is
your duty as rulers that for the sake of
the Hindus you should isue beef and for
the sake of the muhammadans you should
avoid bacon and ham we have hither to
said nothing because we have been cowed
down but you need not consider that you
have not hurt our Feelings by your
conduct we are not expressing our
sentiments either through base
selfishness or fear but because it is
our duty now to speak out boldly we
consider your schools and Law Courts to
be useless we want our own ancient
schools and courts to be restored the
common language of India is not English
but Hindi you should therefore learn it
we can hold communication with you only
in our national
language we cannot tolerate the idea of
your spending money on Railways and the
military we see no occasion for either
you may fear Russia we do not when she
comes we will look after her if you are
with us we will then receive her jointly
we do not need any European cloth we
will manage with articles produced and
manufactured at home you may not keep
one eye on manchest and the other on
India we can work together only if our
interests are identical this has not
been said to you in arrogance you have
great military resources your Naval
power is matchless if we wanted to fight
with you on your own ground we would be
unable to do so but if the above
submissions be not acceptable to you we
cease to play the ruled you may if you
like cut us to pieces you may shatter us
at the Cannon's mouth if you act
contrary to our will we will not help
you and without our help we know that
you cannot move one step
forward it is likely that you will laugh
at all this in the intoxication of your
power we may not be able to disillusion
you at once but if there be any
manliness in US you will see shortly
that your intoxication is suicidal and
that your laugh at our expense is an
aberration of
intellect we believe that at heart you
belong to a religious Nation we are
living in a land which is the source of
religions how we came together need not
be considered but we can make Mutual
good use of our
relations you English who have come to
India are not a good specimen of the
English Nation nor can we almost half
anglicized Indians be considered a good
specimen of the real Indian
Nation if the English Nation were to
know all you have done it would oppose
many of your actions the mass of the
Indians have had few dealings with you
if you will abandon your so-called
civilization and search into your own
scriptures you will find that our
demands are just only on conditions of
our demands being fully satisfied may
you remain in India and if you remain
under those conditions we shall learn
several things from you and you will
learn many from us so doing we shall
benefit each other and the world
but that will happen only when the root
of our relationship is sunk in a
religious
soil
reader what will you say to the
nation editor who is the nation reader
for our purposes it is the nation that
you and I have been thinking of that is
those of us who are affected by European
civilization and who are eager to have
home
rule
editor to these I would say it is only
those Indians who are imbued with real
love who will be able to speak to the
English in the above strain without
being frightened and those only can be
said to be so imbued who conscientiously
believe that Indian civilization is the
best and that European is a nine days
Wonder such ephemeral civilizations have
often come and gone and will continue to
do so those only can be considered to be
so imbued who having experienced the
force of the Soul within themselves will
not cower before brute force and will
not on any account desire to use brute
force those only can be considered to
have been so imbued who are intensely
disatisfied with the present pitiable
condition having already drunk the cup
of
poison if there be only one such Indian
he will speak as above to the English
and the English will have to listen to
him these Dem Dems are not demands but
they show our mental state we will get
nothing by asking we shall have to take
what we want and we need the requisite
strength for the effort and that
strength will be available to him only
who one will only on rare occasions make
use of the English language two if a
lawyer will give up his profession and
take up a hand Loom three if a lawyer
will devote his knowledge to
enlightening both his people and the
english four if a lawyer will not meddle
with the quarrels between parties but
will give up the courts and from his
experience induce the people to do
likewise five if a lawyer will refuse to
be a judge as he will give up his
profession six if a doctor will give up
medicine and understand that rather than
mending bodies he should mend Souls
seven if a doctor will understand that
no matter to what religion he belongs it
is better that bodies remain diseased
rather than that they are cured through
the instrumentality of the Diabolical
Viv section that is practiced in
European schools of
medicine eight although a doctor will
take up a hand Loom and if any patients
come to him will tell them the cause of
their diseases and will advise them to
remove the cause rather than pamper them
by giving useless drugs he will
understand that if by not taking drugs
perchance the patient dies the world
will not come to grief and that he will
have been really merciful to him nine
although a wealthy man regardless of his
wealth will speak out his mind and fear
no one 10 if a wealthy man will devote
his money to establishing hand looms and
encourage others to use handmade Goods
by wearing them
himself 11 like every other Indian will
know that this is a time for repentance
expiation and
mourning 12 like every other Indian will
know that to blame the English is
useless that they came because of us and
remain also for the same reason and that
they will either go or change their
nature only when we reform
ourselves 13 like others we understand
that at a time of mourning there can be
no Indulgence and that whilst we are in
a fallen state to be in jail or in
banishment is much the
best 14 like others we know that it is
superstition to imagine it necessary
that we should guard against being
imprisoned in order that we may deal
with the
people 15 like others will know that
action is much better than speech that
it is our duty to say exactly what we
think and face the consequences and that
it will be only then that we shall be
able to impress anybody with our
speech 16 like others we understand that
we will become free only through
suffering 17 like others will understand
that deportation for life to the
andamans is not enough experation for
the sin of encouraging European
civilization 18 like others will know
that no nation has risen without
suffering that even in physical Warfare
the true test is suffering and not the
killing of others much more so in the
Warfare of passive
resistance 19 like others will know that
it is an idle excuse to say that we will
do a thing when the others also do it
that we should do what we know to be
right and that others will do it when
they see the way that when I fancy a
particular delicacy I do not wait till
others taste it that to make a national
effort and to suffer are in the nature
of Delicacies and that to suffer under
pressure is no
suffering reader this is a large order
when will all carry it
out editor you make a mistake you and I
have nothing to do with the others Let
each do his duty if I do my duty that is
serve myself
I shall be able to serve others before I
leave you I will take the liberty of
repeating one real home rule is
self-rule or
self-control two the way to it is
passive resistance that is soul force or
love Force three in order to exert this
force swadesi in every sense is
necessary four what we want to do should
be be done not because we object to the
English or that we want to retaliate but
because it is our duty to do so thus
supposing that the English remove the
salt tax restore our money give the
highest posts to Indians withdraw the
English troops we shall certainly not
use their machine-made goods nor use the
English language nor many of their
Industries it is worth nothing that
these things are in their nature harmful
hence we do not want them I bear no
enmity towards the English but I do
towards their
civilization in my opinion we have used
the term swaraj without understanding
its real significance I have endeavored
to explain it as I understand it and my
conscience testifies that my life
henceforth is dedicated to its
attainment end of chapter 20
chapter 21 of hind sarage or Indian home
rule this is a LibriVox recording all
LibriVox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
read by Michelle fry Baton Rouge
Louisiana hin suage or Indian home rule
by mandas Karam Chand Gandhi
appendices some
authorities the following books are
recommended for perusal to follow up the
study of the
foregoing the kingdom of God is within
you by
tolto what is art by
tolto slavery of our Times by
tolto the first step
Tolstoy how shall we escape Tolstoy
letter to the Hindu
Tolstoy the white slaves of England
sherard civilization its cause and
cure
Carpenter the fallacy of
speed
Taylor a new
Crusade
blunt on the duty of Civil
Disobedience
thorough life without principle thorough
unto this last
rusin a joy forever Ruskin duties of man
mazini defense and Death of Socrates
from
Plato paradoxes of civilization Max
nordal poverty and unb rule in India now
Roi economic history of India duck
Village
communities
Maine testimonies by eminent men the
following extracts from Mr Alfred web's
valuable collection if the testimony
given therein be true show that the
ancient Indian civilization has little
to learn from the
modern Victor cousin 1792 through
1867 founder of systematic eclecticism
in philosophy
quote on the other hand when we read
with attention the poetical and
philosophical movements of the East
above all those of India which are
beginning to spread in Europe we
discover there so many truths and truths
so profound and which make such a
contrast with the meanness of the
results at which the European genius has
sometimes stopped that we are
constrained to bend the knee before that
of the East and to see in this cradle of
the human race a native land of the
highest philosophy end
quote J Sor K MP Banker in India and
India agent writing in
quote it cannot be too well understood
that our position in India has never
been in any degree that of civilians
bringing civilization to Savage
races when we landed in India we found
there a Hy civilization which during the
progress of thousands of years had
fitted itself into the character and
adjusted itself to the wants of Highly
intellectual races the civilization was
not perfunctory but Universal and all
pervading Furnishing the country not
only with political systems but with
social and domestic institutions of the
most ramified description the beneficent
nature of these institutions as a whole
may be judged of from their effects on
the character of the Hindu race
perhaps there are no other people in the
world who show so much in their
characters the advantageous effects of
their own
civilization they are shrewd in business
acute in reasoning Thrifty religious
sober charitable obedient to parents
reverential to old age amiable
law-abiding compassionate towards the
helpless and patient under
suffering end
quote Frederick Max Mueller lld D quote
if I were to ask myself from what
literature we hear in Europe we who have
been nurtured almost exclusively on the
thoughts of Greeks and Romans and of One
citic race the Jewish May draw that
corrective which is most wanted in order
to make our inner life more perfect more
comprehensive more Universal in fact
more truly human a life not for this
life only but a transfigured and eternal
life again I should point to India end
quote Michael g mulhal f
RSS statistics
1899 prison population of 100,000
inhabitants several European States 100
to
250 England and Wales 90 India
38 dictionary of Statistics Michael g
mhal f RSS rutage and Sons
1899 Colonel Thomas Monroe 32 years
service in India quote if a good system
of agriculture unrivaled manufacturing
skill a capacity to produce whatever can
contribute to convenience or luxury
schools established in every village for
teaching Reading Writing and arithmetic
the general practice of hospitality and
charity among each other and above all
treatment of the Fe female sex full of
confidence respect and delicacy are
among the signs which denote a civilized
people then the Hindus are not inferior
to the nations of Europe and if
civilization is to become an article of
trade between the two countries I am
convinced that this country England will
gain by the import cargo end
quote Frederick V
Schlegel quote it cannot be denied that
the early Indians possessed a knowledge
of the true God all their writings are
replete with sentiments and expressions
Noble clear and severely Grand as deeply
conceived and reverently expressed as in
any human language in which men have
spoken of their God among nations
possessing indigenous philosophy and
metaphysics together with an innate
relish for these Pursuits such as at
present characterizes Germany and in
olden times was the proud distinction of
Greece Hindustan holds the first rank in
point of time
end
quote Sir William wurn Bart quote the
Indian village has thus for centuries
remained a bullwark against political
disorder and the home of the simple
domestic and social virtues no wonder
therefore that philosophers and
historians have always dwelt lovingly on
this ancient institution which is the
natural social unit and the best type of
Rural Life self-contained industrious
peace loving conservative in the best
sense of the word I think you will agree
with me that there is much that is both
picturesque and attractive in this
glimpse of Social and domestic life in
an Indian village it is a harmless and
happy form of human existence moreover
it is not without good practical outcome
end
quote Jay Young secretary seant
Mechanics Institute within recent years
quote those races the Indian viewed from
a moral aspect are perhaps the most
remarkable people in the world they
breathe an atmosphere of moral Purity
which cannot but excite admiration and
this is especially the case with the
poorer classes who not withstanding the
privations of their humble lot appear to
be happy and contented true children of
nature they live on from day to day
taking no thought of tomorrow and
thankful for the simple Fair which
Providence has provided for them it is C
curious to witness the spectacle of
coolies of both sexes returning home at
nightfall after A Hard Day's Work often
lasting from sunrise to sunset in spite
of fatigue from the effects of the
unremitting toil they are for the most
part gay and animated conversing
cheerfully together and occasionally
breaking into snatches of light-hearted
song yet what awaits them on their
return to the Hobs which they call home
a dish of rice for food and the floor
for a bed domestic Felicity appears to
be the rule among the natives and this
is the more strange when the customs of
marriage are taken into account parents
arranging all such matters many Indian
households afford examples of the
married state in its highest degree of
perfection this may be due to the
teachings of the shastras and to the
strict injunctions which they inculcate
with regard to marital obligations but
it is no exaggeration to say that
husbands are generally devotedly
attached to their wives and in many
instances the latter have the most
exalted conception of their duties
towards their husbands end
quote AB J A DUIs missionary in mour
extracts from letter dated seringapatam
15th December
quote the authority of married women
within their houses is chiefly exerted
in the preserving good order and peace
among the persons who compose their
families and a great many among them
discharge this important duty with a
prudence and a discretion which have
scarcely a parallel in Europe I have
known families composed of between 30
and 40 persons or more consisting of
grown-up Sons and Daughters all married
and all having children living together
under the superintendence of an old
matron their mother or mother-in-law the
latter by good management and by
accommodating herself to The Temper of
the daughters-in-law by using according
to circumstances firmness or forbearance
succeeded in preserving peace and
Harmony during many years amongst so
many females who had all jarring
interests and still more jarring tempers
I ask you whether it would be possible
to attain the same end in the same
circumstances in our countries where it
is scarcely possible to make two women
living under the same foot to agree
together in fact there is perhaps no
kind of honest employment in a civilized
country in which the Hindu females have
not a due share besides the management
of the household and the care of the
family which as already noticed under
their control the wives and Daughters of
husband men attend and assist their
husbands and fathers in the labors of
Agriculture those of Tradesmen assist
theirs in carrying on their trade
Merchants are attended and assisted by
theirs in their shops many females are
shopkeepers on their own account and
without a knowledge of the alphabet or
of the decimal scale they keep by other
means their accounts in excellent order
and are considered as still shrewder
than the males themselves in their
commercial
dealings end
quote end of section 21
appendices end of hin swaraj or Indian
home rule by mandas Karam Chand Gandhi